==================================================
       MASTER D3 GUIDE - LOSSLESS MERGE (36 FILES)
==================================================



==================================================
START OF FILE [1/36]: 11th Bio New Ch1 Long Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 1: Biodiversity & Classification

Long Questions

DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONS

THREE-DOMAIN SYSTEM OF CLASSIFICATION

Q1. Explain Three-Domain System of Classification. How is it different from
the Five-Kingdom system?
Ans. Five-Kingdom Classification
• This system was proposed by American ecologist Robert Whittaker in 1969.
• According to this system all living organisms were classified into five kingdoms.
• Monera, Protista Fungi, Plantae and Animalia.
• The kingdom Monera included all prokaryotes (organisms without a nucleus).
• The other four kingdoms included eukaryotes (organisms with a nucleus).
Three-Domain Classification
• An American microbiologist, Carl
Woese in 1990 proposed the three
domain system based on molecular
and genetic studies. His three domain
system provides a more accurate
picture of evolutionary relationships
of organisms.
• Woese discovered that prokaryotes are
not all the same, they exist in two very
different forms:
1. Bacteria
2. Archaea
• He introduced three domains instead of kingdoms:
1. Domain Bacteria - True bacteria (prokaryotes)
2. Domain Archaea - Ancient bacteria-like organisms (prokaryotes)
3. Domain Eukarya - All eukaryotes (Protists, Fungi, Plants, Animals)
Key Differences
• The five-kingdom system grouped all prokaryotes into one kingdom (Monera).
★ Note: All questions and paragraphs marked with a star ★ are explanations of the Box
Information provided in the textbook.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

• The three-domain system separates prokaryotes into two distinct domains: Bacteria
and Archaea.
Molecular evidences suggest Archaea are more closely related to eukaryotes than to
bacteria. Which means Eukarya evolved from Archaea, after archaea split off from bacteria.
Q2. Describe distinguishing unique characteristics of Domain Archaea. Write
their major groups. / Explain how archaea are unique from bacteria and
eukaryya?
Ans. Characteristics of Domain Archaea
In the five-kingdom system, this domain was included in kingdom Monera. The name
Archaea comes from the Greek archaios ("ancient"). They are prokaryotes which diverged
from bacteria in very ancient times.
★ Archaebacteria: Archaea were initially classified as a group of bacteria, and were called
archaeobacteria.
Size: Individual archaeans range from 0.1 um to over 15 um in diameter, some form
aggregates or filaments up to 200 um in length.
Morphology
They occur in various shapes, such as spherical, rod-shape, spiral, lobed, or rectangular.
Reproduction: Archaea reproduce asexually by binary or multiple fission,
fragmentation, or budding. Mitosis and meiosis do not occur in archaea.
Archeans are unique because;
1. Cell Membrane
• Archaean's cell membrane contains lipids with ether-linkage between glycerol and
fatty acid chains. The fatty acid
chains are branched. That's why
their cell membranes are more
resistant to extreme conditions.
• Bacteria and Eukarya have
membrane lipids with fatty acids
attached to glycerol by ester
linkages. The fatty acid chains are
unbranched.
2. Cell Wall Composition
• The cell walls of archaea lack
cellulose and peptidoglycan. Instead,
they contain distinct polysaccharides,
and proteins.
• Some archaea have
pseudopeptidoglycan.
• On the other hand, bacterial cell
walls contain peptidoglycan, a
polymer consisting of sugars and
amino acids that provides structural
support.
• In Eukarya, the cell walls, if present,
are composed of cellulose (in plants)
or chitin (in fungi).
Branched Chain
Ether
linkage
Phosphate group
Glycerol
Membrane lipid in Archaea
Unbranched Chain
Ether
linkage
Membrane lipid in Bacteria & Eukarya
Fig: Difference in membrane lipids of
Archaea and other organisms

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 3 ---
3. Genetic Differences
Archaea share several genetic sequences and regulatory features with eukaryotes,
highlighting their closer evolutionary relationship.
4. Metabolism
• Archaea have unique metabolic processes like methanogenesis (production of methane),
which is not found in bacteria or Eukarya.
• Bacteria exhibit metabolic pathways, including photosynthesis, nitrogen fixation and
fermentation.
• In Eukarya, the metabolic processes are often more complex and include cellular
respiration, photosynthesis (in plants and algae), and various forms of fermentation.
Major Groups of Archaea
The major groups of Archaea include;
• Methanogens-produce methane as a metabolic byproduct.
• Halobacteria-live in extremely saline environments.
• Thermococci-found in hot environments.
• Thaumarchaeota involved in nitrogen cycle.

Methanogens Halobacteria Thermoplasmata Thermococci
Fig: Major groups of Archaea
Q3. Describe the general characteristics of Domain Bacteria. / Describe the
characteristics which distinguish bacteria from other domains.
Ans. General characteristics of Domain Bacteria
In the five-kingdom system, this domain was included in kingdom Monera. They are the
true bacteria. They possess several distinct characteristics that differentiate them from
other domains i.e., Archaea and Eukarya.
General Characteristics
Here are the general characteristics of the domain Bacteria:
• Cell Structure: Like archaea, bacteria possess prokaryotic cell i.e., lack a true nucleus
and membrane-bound organelles.
• Cell Wall Composition: Bacteria have a cell wall composed of peptidoglycan (murein),
a unique polymer that provides structural support and shape.
• Genetic Material: Like Archaea, bacteria possess a single, circular chromosome
composed of DNA, located in the nucleoid region.

--- Page 4 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

• Plasmids: Most bacteria have small, circular DNA molecules that can be transferred
between bacteria, aiding in genetic diversity and adaptation.
• Reproduction: Bacteria primarily reproduce asexually through binary fission, a process
where a single cell divides into two identical daughter cells.
• Nutritional Modes: Include autotrophs (self-feeding, e.g., photosynthetic bacteria) and
heterotrophs (feeding on organic matter, e.g., decomposers).
• Morphology: Bacteria exhibit a variety of
shapes, such as cocci (spherical), bacilli
(rod-shaped), spirilla (spiral-shaped), and
vibrios (comma-shaped).
• Arrangement: Cells may be found singly,
in pairs (diplococci), chains (streptococci),
clusters (staphylococci), or other
arrangements based on species-specific
characteristics.
• Flagella: Many bacteria have one or more
flagella, whip-like structures that enable
movement.
• Pili and Fimbriae: These are hair-like
structures in some bacteria. They help in
attachment to surfaces and in exchange of
genetic material with other bacteria.
• Respiration: Bacteria can be obligate
aerobes, obligate anaerobes, facultative
anaerobes, microaerophiles or aerotolerant
anaerobes. Some bacteria perform
fermentation to produce energy in the
absence of oxygen.
• Extremophiles: Some bacteria thrive in
extreme conditions, such as high
temperatures (thermophiles), high salinity
(halophiles), and low pH (acidophiles).
• Pathogenicity: Some bacteria cause
diseases in humans, animals, and plants, producing toxins or other virulence factors.
• Symbiosis: Many bacteria live in symbiotic relationships with other organisms, including
mutualism (both benefit) and commensalism (one benefits, the other is not harmed).
Major Groups of Bacteria
• The domain Bacteria is divided into numerous groups. For example:
Proteobacteria (Gram negative) e.g., Escherichia coli, Rhizobium. Helicobacter pylori.
• Firmicutes (Gram positive) e.g., Bacillus subtilis, Lactobacillus, Clostridium botulinum.
• Actinobacteria e.g., Streptomyces, Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
• Cyanobacteria e.g., Anabaena, Spirulina.
• Spirochaetes e.g., Treponema pallidum.
• Acidobacteria e.g., Acidobacterium.
• Aquificae e.g., Aquifex pyrophilus.

Cocci (Spherical)

Bacilli(rod-shaped)

Vibrio (Comma-shaped) Spirilla (spiral-shaped)
Fig: Different forms of Bacteria

REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 5 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

Q4. Explain the general characteristics of Domain Eukarya.
Ans. General characteristics of Domain Eukarya
The domain Eukarya encompasses all organisms with eukaryotic cells, which are
fundamentally different from the prokaryotic cells of Bacteria and Archaea.
General Characteristics
Here are the general characteristics of the domain Eukarya that justify its classification as a
separate domain.
• Cell Structure: They possess eukaryotic cells - with true nucleus enclosed by a nuclear
membrane. Cells have membrane-bounded organelles e.g., mitochondria, chloroplasts
(in plants and algae), endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, lysosomes and
peroxisomes. Cells also have cytoskeleton i.e., a complex network of microtubules,
microfilaments, and intermediate filaments that provides structural support, enables cell
movement and facilitates intracellular transport.
• Genetic Material: Their DNA is organized into multiple linear chromosomes within the
nucleus. DNA is associated with histone proteins, which help in the organization and
regulation of genetic material.
• Reproduction: Most eukaryotes undergo sexual reproduction involving meiosis and
fertilization, leading to genetic diversity. Some eukaryotes can also reproduce asexually
through mitosis, producing genetically identical offspring.
• Complex Cellular Organization: In multicellular eukaryotes, cells differentiate into
specialized types forming tissues and organs with specific functions.
• Evolutionary Relationships: Eukaryotes are believed to have originated through
endosymbiosis, where certain prokaryotic cells such as aerobic bacteria (mitochondria)
and cyanobacteria (chloroplasts) were engulfed by anaerobic prokaryotic amoeboid cell (a
host cell), leading to a symbiotic relationship.

TAXONOMIC HIERARCHY

Q5. Elaborate the hierarchical system for the classification of living
organisms.
Ans. The classification of living organisms is organized into a hierarchical system that
allows scientists to categorize and understand the relationships between different forms of
life. This system includes several levels, known as taxa (singular: taxon), each representing
a rank in the biological classification system. The primary levels of this hierarchy are:
kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, and species. Below is a detailed description of
each level.
1. Domain
It is the highest level of classification. Currently, there are three domains: Archaea,
Bacteria and Eukarya.
2. Kingdom
The kingdom is one of the highest taxonomic ranks, just below domain. It groups together
all forms of life that share fundamental characteristics.
• Example: In the domain Eukarya, there are several kingdoms, such as Animalia
(animals), Plantae (plants), Fungi (fungi), and Protista (protists).

REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 6 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM
3. Phylum
Phylum is the next level of classification below kingdom. Organisms within a phylum share
a basic body plan and significant structural features.
• Example: In the kingdom Animalia, the phylum Chordata includes all animals with a
notochord, such as mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and fishes.
4. Class
Class further divides organisms within a phylum
based on more specific common traits.
• Example: Within the phylum Chordata, the
class Mammalia includes all mammals, which
are characterized by having hair and
mammary glands.
5. Order
Order categorizes organisms within a class
based on additional shared characteristics
and evolutionary history.
• Example: Within the class Mammalia, the
order Primates includes humans, monkeys,
and apes, characterized by their large brains
and opposable thumbs.
6. Family
Family groups organisms within an order that
are even more closely related, sharing more
precise common attributes.
• Example: Within the order Primates, the
family Hominidae includes great apes and
humans.
7. Genus
Genus is a more specific rank within a family,
grouping species that are very closely related
and often visually similar.
• Example: Within the family Hominidae, the
genus Homo includes humans and closest
extinct relatives.
8. Species
Species is the most specific level of classification,
representing a single type of organism. Members
of a species can interbreed and produce fertile offspring.
• Example: Within the genus Homo, the species Homo sapiens refers to modern humans.
Fig: Taxonomic hierarchy
REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 7 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

| Taxonomic Rank | Human (Homo sapiens) | Sparrow (Passer domesticus) | Onion (Allium cepa) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Domain | Eukarya | Eukarya | Eukarya |
| Kingdom | Animalia | Animalia | Plantae |
| Phylum | Chordata | Chordata | Angiosperms |
| Class | Mammalia | Aves | Monocots |
| Order | Primates | Passeriformes | Asparagales |
| Family | Hominidae | Passeridae | Amaryllidaceae |
| Genus | Homo | Passer | Allium |
| Species | Homo sapiens | Passer domesticus | Allium cepa |

SALIENT FEATURES OF KINGDOMS OF DOMAIN EUKARYA
Q6. What are the salient features of kingdoms of domain Eukarya? / Describe main characteristics of kingdom protoctista, fungi, plantae and animalia. Provide examples for each kingdom.
Ans. Eukarya consists of kingdoms protista, fungi, plantae and animalia. It includes all eukaryotes which consist of complex, eukaryotic cells, containing nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles.
1. Kingdom Protista
Kingdom Protista includes eukaryote which are unicellular or colonial or filamentous or simple multicellular. Simple multicellular means that they do not have multicellular sex organs. There are three types of protists.
Major Groups or Protists
• Protozoa: The group Protozoa includes animal-like protists. They are unicellular and are heterotrophic. Examples are Paramecium, Amoeba, Plasmodium, and Trypanosoma.
• Algae: The group Algae includes plant-like protists. They have cell walls made of cellulose. They have chlorophyll and are autotrophs. Examples include Euglena, diatoms, dinoflagellates, red algae, green algae, brown algae.
• Fungi-like protists: The groups Myxomycota and Oomycota include Fungi-like protists. They have hyphae-like structure and are saprophytic e.g., slime molds and water molds.
★ Parasitic protists: Certain protists are parasitic and cause diseases like malaria (Plasmodium), amoebic dysentery (Entamoeba histolytica), and sleeping sickness (Trypanosoma).

Euglena Paramecium Slime mold Water mold
Fig: Common protists

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 8 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

2. Kingdom Fungi
Fungi are eukaryotic, heterotrophic organisms that are unicellular or multicellular. Their
cells are covered by cell wall made of chitin (a polysaccharide). Fungi get nutrients in a
unique way. They do not ingest food like animals and some protists. They absorb food
from surroundings. Examples are mushrooms, rusts, smuts and molds.
★ Uses: Some fungi are used in the production of bread, cheese and beer. Others have
medicinal properties, such as penicillin, an antibiotic derived from the fungus Penicillium.
Major Groups of Fungi
The following are the major groups of fungi:
• Zygomycota includes the fungi which lack septa (aseptate) in their hyphae. Examples
are Rhizopus (bread molds), which grow on moist bread, fruits etc.
• Ascomycota includes the largest groups of fungi. They have septate hyphae. Examples
include common molds, morels, truffles, cup fungi, neurospora and yeasts.
★ Lichens and mycorrhizae: There are about 100,000 known species of fungi. Most of
the Ascomycetes are found in lichens and some are found in mycorrhizae.
• Basidiomycota includes the fungi with septate hyphae. Examples are mushrooms,
toadstools, puffballs, jelly fungi and bracket/shelf fungi, rusts and smuts.

Smut fungi on leaf Toadstool Bracket fungi Sweet tooth fungi
Fig: Common fungi
3. Kingdom Plantae
It includes plants which are eukaryotic, multicellular organisms with cell walls made of
cellulose. They are autotrophic and prepare food through photosynthesis. All plants
develop from embryos. Examples are mosses, ferns, conifers and flowering plants.
Major Groups of Plants
Plants are divided into two major groups:
• Non-vascular plants or bryophytes lack conducting tissues (xylem and phloem).
Examples include liverworts, hornworts, and mosses.
• Vascular plants or tracheophytes have conducting tissues. Vascular plants are of two
types i.e., seedless plants (e.g., ferns) and seed plants (e.g., conifers and flowering plants).
Seed producing vascular plants are Gymnosperms (naked seeds) i.e., cone- bearing, no
flowers or fruits (e.g., Pine and Spruce) whereas Angiosperms (flowering plants) are the
most diverse plant group (235000 species) which produce seeds enclosed in fruits
(Monocots e.g., grass, corn and Dicots e.g., rose and sunflower).

REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 9 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Moss
Liverwort
Hornwort
Non-Vascular (bryophytes)

Sago palm
Pine
Cedrus
Ginkgo bilobai

Capsicum
Mustard
Vascular plants
Fig: Major groups of Kingdom Plantae

4. Kingdom Animalia
This kingdom of eukaryotes includes animals which are eukaryotic, multicellular and
heterotrophic. They develop from embryos. They ingest food and digest it within their
bodies, e.g., mammals, birds, reptiles etc.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 10 ---
Q7. Draw a table showing distinguishing characteristics of kingdoms of Three
domains.
Ans.
Table: Distinguishing Characteristics of the kingdoms of three domains
Domain Bacteria Archaea Eukarya
Kingdom Monera Protista Fungi Plantae Animalia
Cell Type Prokaryotic Prokaryotic Eukaryotic Eukaryotic Eukaryotic Eukaryotic
Nuclear
Envelope Absent Absent Present Present Present Present
Presence of In all In all In some, In all In all Absent
Cell Wall Absent in
animal like
protists
Compositio Peptidoglycan Various Polysaccharides Chitin Cellulose and No Cell
n of cell Chemicals and proteins other wall
wall polysaccharid
es
Mode of Autotroph or Autotroph Photosynthetic Absorptive Photosyntheti Ingestive
Nutrition heterotroph or or heterotroph, heterotroph c autotrophs heterotrop
heterotroph or combination hs
Multi Absent Absent Absent in most Present in Present in all Present in
cellularity forms most forms forms all forms

Basic terminologies related to kingdom animalia
The animals (multicellular = metazoa) are subclassified into:
i. Parazoa (phylum Porifera) these animals lack tissues organized into organs and have
indeterminate shape, and are asymmetrical.
ii. Eumetazoa includes animals of other phyla, these animals have tissues organized into
organs and organ systems. These include radially symmetrical animals (grade Radiata)
and bilaterally symmetrical animals (grade Bilateria).
(a) Grade Radiata includes simplest of the Eumetazoa (phylum Cnidaria), they are much
simpler in their organization.
(b) Grade Bilateria includes the animals where the right side is approximately the same as
the left side and where there is a distinct anterior end is said to have bilateral symmetry.
The animal can be divided into two equal parts by an imaginary line only in one plane.
Diploblastic animals
The body of these animals consists of two layers of cells, ectoderm and endoderm. Animals
show lesser degree of specialization and do not form specialized organs. There is no special
transport system. No central nervous system. Sac like digestive system is present.
Triploblastic animals
The body of these animals is made from three layers' ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm.
The cells of these animals show greater degree of specialization and have specialized organ

--- Page 11 ---
and organ system. Special transport systems i.e. blood vascular system is present. Central
nervous system is present. Tube like digestive system is present.
The body of these animals is made of three layers’ ectoderm mesoderm and endoderm.
After embryonic development these layers in most triploblastic animals are not distinct as
separate layers of cells, but are represented by the structures formed from them. The cells of
these animals show greater degree of specialization. These have specialized organs and
organs systems. Special transport systems i.e. blood vascular system is present in most of the
cases.
Ectoderm: The germinal layer that develops into systems such as integumentary and
nervous system.
Mesoderm: The germinal layer that develops into muscular, skeletal and reproductive
systems.
Endoderm: The germinal layer that forms the lining of digestive tract and forms other
glands of digestive system, such as liver.
Triploblastic animals may be acoelomate, pseudocoelomates or coelomate.
Acoelomates
In phylum Platyhelminthes there is no body cavity or coelom, and the mesoderm forms a
loose, cellular tissue called mesenchyma or parenchyma which fills the space between the
ectoderm and endoderm. It forms a packing around the internal organs of the animals to
support and protect them. Such animals are called acoelomates.
Pseudocoelomates
In Aschelminthes the space between the body wall and the digestive tube is called
pseudocoelom (false body cavity). Pseudocoelom is not homologous to true coelom
because: is not lined by coelomic epithelium. It has no relation with the reproductive and
excretory organs. It develops from the blastocoel of the embryo and it is bounded externally
by the muscles and internally by the cuticle of the intestine. The animals having
pseudocoelom are called pseudocoelomates.
Coelomates
Coelom is cavity present between the body wall and the alimentary canal and is lined by
mesoderm. The mesoderm splits into outer parietal layer which underlines the body wall and
the visceral layer which covers the alimentary canal and the cavity between them is the true
coelom. It is filled with fluid called coelomic fluid. The animals which possess coelom or
true body cavity are called coelomates e.g., animals from annelids to chordates.

Mesodermal
organ
Mesoderm (muscle)
Ectoderm
Mesodermal
peritoneum
Ectoderm
Coelom
Gut
Parenchyma
(mesoderm)
Gut
Mesentery
Mesodermal
organ
Gut (endoderm)
Pseudocoel
(from blastocoel)
Gut (endoderm)
Mesodermal
organ
Acoelomate
Pseudocoelomate
Eucoelomaic

--- Page 12 ---
The coelomates are further divided into;
i. Proterostomes
In protostomes, the blastopore (the first opening in the developing embryo) becomes the
mouth. Coelom or body cavity is formed due to splitting of mesoderm (schizocoelous). This
series includes animals belonging to phyla Aschelminthes annelida, mollusca and
arthropoda.
ii. Deuterostomes
The mouth is formed at some distance anterior to the blastopore and blastopore forms the
anus. Coelom is developed as an outpouching of archenterons (enterocoelous). This series
includes animals belonging to phyla Echinodermata, hemichordate and chordata.
CLASSIFICATION OF KINGDOM ANIMALIA
Q8. Discuss the general characteristics of Phylum Porifera.
Ans. General characteristics of Phylum Porifera (literal meaning: pore bearing)
This phylum contains sponges.
1. Habitat: Most of them are marine while some live in freshwaters. Leucosolenia and
Euplectella (Venus flower basket) are marine sponges. Spongilla is a common freshwater
sponge.
2. Level of Organization: Sponges do not have tissue level organization. Most sponges are
asymmetrical but some have radial symmetry.
3. Nervous System: They do not have nervous system.
4. Water Flow System: There are numerous pores in body wall called ostia. Through ostia,
water enters the body. The larger pore through which water leaves the body is called
osculum.

Pinacocyte Amoeboid Choanocyte
Cell
Ostium
Mesohyle
Epidormus
Spicule
Collar
Chaonocyte
Flagellum
Osculum
Ostium
Spongocoel
Fig: Representative sponges and general structure
Leucosolenia
Euplectella
Spongilla

--- Page 13 ---
5. Body Structure
• The outer layer (pinacoderm) of body is made of thin, flat cells called pinacocytes.
• The middle layer is jelly-like and is called mesohyle. It contains amoeboid cells.
• The inner layer (choanoderm), which lines the spongocoel, is made of choanocytes or collar cells.
• They have skeleton in the form of minute needles of calcium carbonate or silica.
6. Reproduction
Most sponges reproduce asexually by budding or regeneration. Some sponges form resistant capsules, called gemmules. When parent sponge dies, it releases its gemmules. In favourable environment, amoeboid cells come out of the gemmules and form a new sponge.
Q9. Describe the general characteristics of Phylum Cnidaria.
Ans. General characteristics of Phylum Cnidaria
1. Habitat
Almost all cnidarians are marine, although a few are found in freshwater e.g., hydra and jellyfish. Most cnidarians are colonial e.g., obelia, corals, sea fans etc. Most of them are sessile e.g., hydra, coral, obelia etc. Some cnidarians are motile e.g., jellyfish.
2. Symmetry
They are radially symmetrical animals and are diploblastic.
3. Body Structure
The adult body contains two tissue layers i.e., the epidermis and the gastrodermis, derived from ectoderm and endoderm respectively. Between the epidermis and gastrodermis, a jelly-like mesoglea is present. It contains amoeboid cells that have originated either from ectoderm or endoderm.
4. Defense System
They possess special cells, called cnidocytes. A cnidocyte contains a special organelle, called nematocyst. Nematocysts defend the body and captures prey.
5. Digestive System
Cnidarians have a blind-ending cavity, called gastrovascular cavity or enteron. It opens outside by a single opening, the mouth. Mouth also acts as anus for the removal of undigested material. Mouth is surrounded by a series of projections, called tentacles. This type of digestive system in which there is a single opening for the entry of food and removal of undigested matter, is called sac-like/sac-type digestive system.

Tentacles
Tentacle
Shelf
Sea anemone
Medusa
bud
Bud
Bud
Basal
disc
Hydra
Obelia
Jellyfish
Fig: Representative cnidarians

--- Page 14 ---
6. Nervous System
The nervous system is in the form of a network of neurons in the body wall. There is no
central nervous system (brain and spinal cord), respiratory, excretory and transport systems.
7. Body Forms
There are two body forms in cnidarians i.e., polyps and medusae.
• Polyps are cylindrical and are attached to a substrate at the aboral end. They reproduce
asexually.
• Medusae are umbrella-like and are free-swimming. They reproduce sexually.
Q10. Describe the general characteristics of Phylum Platyhelminthes.
Ans. General characteristics of Phylum Platyhelminthes (literal meaning: flat worms)
They are called “flatworms”. They are unsegmented and body is soft and dorsoventrally
compressed.
1. Habitat: Most of them are free-living e.g., planaria. Some are endoparasites of humans
and other animals e.g., liver fluke, tapeworm, and blood-fluke.
2. Body Organization
They are triploblastic i.e., the tissues of the body are derived from three embryonic
layers i.e. ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm.
★ Segmented body: Tape worm belonging to phylum Platyhelminthes are segmented.
3. Body Cavity
They are acoelomates (no body cavity). A loose connective tissue called parenchyma
fills space between the body wall and body organs.
4. Bilateral Symmetry
They have bilateral symmetry with distinct left and right sides as well as dorsal and ventral
sides.
5. Excretory System
They have a network of tubular protonephridia. These tubules have numerous branches. Each
branch ends in a bulb-like cell called flame cell.
The cilia of flame cells beat to suck surrounding fluid into the tubules. The tubules filter the
waste materials from fluid and release them out of body wall through a small opening called
a nephridiopore.

Planaria
Liver Fluke
Tape Worm
Fig: Representative flatworms
6. Respiratory and circulatory system
They do not have respiratory and circulatory (transport) systems.
7. Nervous System
They have a network of neurons. There are cerebral ganglia in the anterior end (head). These
ganglia are attached to longitudinal nerve cords that are interconnected across the body
by transverse branches.

--- Page 15 ---
8. Eyespots
Most free-living flatworms have two simple eyespots at their anterior end.
9. Reproduction
Flatworms reproduce asexually by "fission" in which the animal constricts in the middle
and then divides into two pieces. Each piece then regenerates the missing part. The sexually-
reproducing flatworms are hermaphrodites (bisexual).
Q11. Outline the general characteristics of Phylum Nematoda.
Ans. General characteristics of Phylum Nematoda (literal meaning: thread-like)
★Aschelminths: They are roundworms with elongated worm-like (round) body with
pointed ends.
The pseudocoelomates are classified in seven phyla. These phyla are grouped as a unit
called Aschelminths. Phylum Nematoda is the representative phylum of this group.
1. Habitat: Some roundworms are free-living (in water and soil) e.g., Caenorhabditis
elegans. Many are parasites e.g., ascaris, hookworm, pinworm, and whipworm.
2. Body Organization
They are triploblastic, bilateral symmetrical, and possess unsegmented bodies.
Body Cavity: They are pseudocoelomates because they possess a false body cavity called
pseudocoelom filled with fluid.
3. Digestive System
They possess tube-like digestive system. It consists of an alimentary canal with two
openings; mouth at anterior end and anus at posterior end.
The parasitic roundworms have simplified digestive systems.
4. Excretory System
Their excretory system consists of protonephridia and two excretory canals, which unite at
the anterior end to form a single canal. The single canal then opens outside through a
nephridiopore on the ventral surface.

Ascaris Pinworm Trichinella
Anus Intestine Pharynx Mouth
Reproductive pore Nephridiopore Nerve ring
Fig: Representative roundworms and general structure

--- Page 16 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

5. Nervous system
They possess a network of neurons in body. There is a nerve ring around the pharynx, which
is attached to four longitudinal nerve cords.
6. Sense Organ
They have raised hair-like sense organ called sensory papillae, present on lips.
7. Respiratory and circulatory system
They do not have defined respiratory and circulatory systems.
8. Reproduction
They are unisexual i.e., male nematodes have testes and female nematodes have ovaries.
Q12. Describe the general characteristics of Phylum Mollusca.
Ans. General characteristics of Phylum Mollusca (literal meaning: soft bodied)
Molluscs have soft un-segmented bodies.
1. Habitat: They are widely distributed in natural habitats. Some of them are exclusively
aquatic e.g., mussels, octopus and oyster. The others live in moist places e.g., land snail.
2. Body organization
Molluscs are triploblastic and have bilateral symmetry. They possess true coelom. Among
coelomates, they are included in the group called protostomes.
3. Body Structure
Their body can be divided into three parts i.e., head, visceral mass (contains organs of
digestion, excretion and reproduction), and foot (attached with visceral mass).
4. Mantle Cavity
They have an epithelial envelope around the visceral mass, called as mantle. The space
between mantle and visceral mass is called as mantle cavity. In most molluscs, the outer
surface of mantle secretes a calcareous shell.
5. Radula
All molluscs (except bivalvia) have is a rasping tongue-like organ, called radula.

Class Gastropoda
Slug Garden snail
Class Bivalvia
Freshwater mussel Oyster
Class Cephalopoda
Cuttlefish Octopus
Fig: Representative molluscs and general structure

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 17 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

6. Circulatory System
All of them (except cephalopods) have open type blood circulatory system. Their heart
consists of a single ventricle and two auricles.
7. Digestive System
They possess tube-like digestive system in which the gut has two openings, i.e., mouth and
anus.
8. Excretory System
Their excretory system consists of paired tubular structures called nephridia. Wastes are
gathered from sinuses and discharged into coelom around the heart. The nephridia open in
this coelom. They have tiny cilia around their openings, which move the fluid from coelom
into the nephridia. Nephridia discharge waste materials in mantle cavity, from where they
are expelled out.
9. Respiratory System
In molluscs, gills work for the exchange of gases.
10. Nervous System
They have three pairs of interconnected ganglia present in the head, visceral mass and
foot. The ganglia are interconnected by means of nerve cord.
11. Locomotion
They move with the help of muscular foot. Some molluscs are sessile. Most molluscs are
unisexual.
12. Classes of molluscs
i. Class Gastropoda e.g., slug, garden snail.
ii. Class Bivalvia e.g., fresh water mussel, oyster
iii. Class Cephalopoda e.g., octopus, cuttle fish.
Q13. Describe the general characteristics of Phylum Annelida.
Ans. General characteristics of Phylum Annelida (literal meaning: little rings)
Annelids are commonly called segmented worms.
1. Habitat
They are found in marine water (e.g., nereis), freshwater (e.g., leech), and in damp soil (e.g.,
earthworm). Some annelids are ectoparasites e.g., leeches.
2. Body organization
Annelids are bilaterally symmetrical and triploblastic. They are protostome coelomates.
3. Metameric Segmentation
Their body is divided transversely into a number of similar parts called segments. Internally,
the segments are separated from each other by cross walls called septa. Each segment is
provided with its own circulatory, excretory and neural elements. This type of
segmentation in body is called metameric segmentation.
4. Setae
Annelids have special parts called setae. Setae are chitinous bristles in the ventral wall of
each segment. They are used for anchoring the worm during movement. Setae are absent in
leeches. Their body wall is surrounded by a moist, acellular cuticle secreted by epidermis.
5. Digestive System
They possess tube-like digestive system. The digestive tube is divided into distinct parts,
each performing a specific function. The parasitic annelids have simplified digestive system.

REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 18 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Nereis
Leech
Earthworm
Anus
Pseudohearts
Coelom
Cerebral ganglion
Septum
Mouth
Setae
Nerve cord
Blood vessels
Metanephridium
Digestive tube
Fig: Representative annelids and general structure

6. Excretory System
Their excretory system consists of ciliated, funnel-shaped metanephridia. Each segment
has one pair of metanephridia.
7. Circulatory System
They possess a closed-type circulatory system. Blood always flows in blood vessels. They
have specialized pulsating blood vessels (pseudohearts). Blood of most annelids has
respiratory pigment, haemoglobin, dissolved in blood plasma.
8. Respiratory System
Gaseous exchange occurs through the skin.
9. Nervous system
There is a cerebral ganglion or brain in the anterior segment. A double, longitudinal
ventral nerve cord arises from brain and gives nerves in each segment. Ganglia are also
present in each segment.
10. Receptors
They have tactile receptors, chemoreceptors, balance receptors, and photoreceptors.
Some annelids also have well-developed eyes with lenses.
11. Reproductive System
Most annelids are hermaphrodite (e.g., earthworm, leech) and some are unisexual (e.g.,
nereis).

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 19 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM
Q14. Elaborate the general characteristics of Phylum Arthropoda.
Ans. General characteristics of Phylum Arthropoda (literal meaning: jointed legs)
1. Habitat
Diverse groups such as insects, crustaceans, spiders, scorpions, and centipedes are included
in this phylum. They are found in every type of habitat. Many of terrestrial members can
also fly.
2. Body Symmetry
They are triploblastic, bilateral symmetrical, protostome coelomates. The coelom is
reduced and is present only around reproductive and excretory systems.
3. Jointed Appendages
They have jointed appendages which are modified for specialized functions e.g., running,
crawling swimming, capturing prey, respiration, reproduction etc. In different arthropods,
the jointed appendages around the mouth, are modified in different ways and form mouth
parts.
4. Body Structure
The body is segmented. Some segments are fused to form specialized body regions called
tagmata. These include head, thorax and abdomen.
5. Exoskeleton and Ecdysis
They have exoskeleton or cuticle, which is secreted by the epidermis of body wall. It is
made chiefly of chitin. In young arthropods, exoskeleton is shed from time to time. After
shedding the exoskeleton, the animal grows at a fast rate and then re-secretes new
exoskeleton. This process is called ecdysis or molting. This process is carried out by a
hormone called ecdysone.
Class Crustacea
Class Insecta
Crayfish
Crab
Wasp
Grasshopper
Head, Thorax, Abdomen
Cerebral
ganglia
Compound
eye
Antenna
Mouthparts
Wings
Tracheal tubes
Hearts
Blood vessel
Digestive
tube
Nerve
cord
Ventral
ganglia
Anus
Malpighian
tubes
Class Arachnida
Class Myriapoda
Spider
Mite
Centipede
Millipede
Fig: Representative arthropods and general structure
REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 20 ---
6. Circulatory System
They possess open-type circulatory system. Most of the time, blood flows in hemocoel,
which is derived from an embryonic cavity called blastocoel. Their blood is colourless as it
is without haemoglobin and is known as haemolymph.
7. Respiratory System
Most arthropods possess a respiratory system that consists of air tubes called trachea. Main
tracheal tubes open out through openings called spiracles. Aquatic arthropods respire
through gills.
8. Digestive System
Arthropods have tube-like digestive system. The alimentary canal is divided into different
parts. (i.e. mouth, esophagous, crop, gizzard, mesenteron, ileum, colon, rectum and anus).
9. Excretory System
Their excretory system comprises of Malpighian tubules. These are narrow tubules
projected from the alimentary canal, attached at the junction of midgut and hindgut. The
nitrogenous wastes are excreted in the form of solid uric acid crystals.
10. Nervous System
They have well-developed central nervous system with three fused pairs of cerebral
ganglia (brain) in head. There is a double ventral nerve cord which has ventral ganglia in
each segment. Smaller nerves arise from ventral ganglia in each segment. They have well
developed compound eyes and antennae. They can swim, crawl or fly depending on their
habitat.
11. Reproductive System
They are unisexual and lay eggs.
12. Classes
i. Class Crustacean e.g., cray fish, crab.
ii. Class Insecta e.g., fly, mosquito, butterfly.
iii. Class Arachinida e.g., spider, mite, scorpion.
iv. Class Myriapoda e.g., centipede, millipede.
13. Important arthropods
Include insects (e.g., mosquito, butterfly, moth, wasp, beetles, grasshopper), crabs, lobsters,
prawn, shrimps, crayfishes, spider, tick, mite, scorpion, centipedes and millipedes.
Q15. Explain the general characteristics of Phylum Echinodermata.
Ans. General characteristics of Phylum Echinodermata (literal meaning: spiny
skinned animals)
1. Habitat
They are exclusively marine animals. Some are flattened like biscuit (e.g., cake urchin),
some are star-shaped with short arms (e.g., sea star or starfish), some are globular (e.g., sea
urchin), some are star-shaped with long arms (e.g., brittle star), and some are elongated
(e.g., sea cucumber).
2. Organization
They are triploblastic and deuterostomes coelomates. Their larvae are bilateral
symmetrical but the adults show radial symmetry. In their radial symmetry, the body parts
are arranged in five, or multiple of five, around an oral-aboral axis.
3. Skeleton

--- Page 21 ---
They possess a calcareous endoskeleton in the form of plates called ossicles. These plates
are derived from mesoderm but come out of skin also and make spines on the skin.
4. Water-Vascular System
They have water-vascular system consisting of tubes and spaces present in the coelom. A
ring canal surrounds the mouth. It opens outside through a sieve-like plate, called
madreporite. Five (or a multiple of five) radial canals branch from the ring canal. Many
lateral canals emerge from each radial canal and each lateral canal ends at a tube foot. Tube
feet are the extensions of water vascular system.

Sea star
Cake urchin
Brittle star
Madreporite
Anus
Stomach
Radial canal
Gonads
Tube foot
Central ring canal
Ampulla
Podium
Digestive glands
Sea urchin
Fig: Representative echinoderms and general structure

5. Tube Feet
The tube feet extend and attach with some substrate. When water is drawn back from the
sucked tube feet, they contracts and body is pulled.
6. Digestive System
Echinoderms possess tube-like digestive system. The mouth leads to oesophagus, stomach,
intestine and rectum. The rectum opens out through anus.
7. Respiratory and excretory system
There are no specialized organs for respiration and excretion.
8. Nervous system
They possess a poorly developed nervous system made of a nerve net, a nerve ring, and five
(or multiple of five) radial nerves. Most sensory receptors are distributed over the surface
of the body and tube feet.
9. Reproduction
Asexual reproduction involves division of the body, followed by the regeneration of each
half. Echinoderms are unisexual.

--- Page 22 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

★ Regeneration in Echinoderms: Many echinoderms are able to regenerate the lost parts,
and some, especially sea stars and brittle stars, drop various part when they are under attack
and then regenerate the lost parts.
Q16. Outline the major four characteristics to Chordata, also describe their
major groups.
Ans. Chordates are bilateral symmetrical, triploblastic, deuterostome coelomates. The
following four characteristics are unique to chordates, present at some stage in development.
1. Notochord: All chordates develop notochord during embryonic life. It is a rod-like semi
rigid body of vacuolated cells. It extends throughout the length of body between gut and
dorsal nerve cord. The lower chordates retain this notochord throughout life. While, in
vertebrates it is partly or entirely replaced by vertebral column, during development.
2. Pharyngeal slits: These are a series of openings in the lateral walls of pharynx. All
chordates develop paired gill slits in embryonic stage. In some chordates (e.g., Amphioxus
and fishes), these develop into gills. In some (e.g., most amphibians), these are functional
for some period in their life history. In others (e.g., reptiles, birds and mammals), these are
modified for various purposes.
3. Tubular nerve cord: In all chordates, a tubular nerve cord runs through the longitudinal axis
of the body. just dorsal to the notochord. It
expands anteriorly as a brain.
4. Post anal tail: All chordates develop a
tail, posteriorly beyond the anal opening.
Some chordates retain it throughout life
while others degenerate it during
embryonic life.
Classification
Phylum Chordata includes two major
groups i.e., invertebrate chordates and vertebrates.
Invertebrate Chordates (Lower Chordates)
i. Subphylum Urochordata includes the invertebrates chordates in which notochord and
nerve cord are present only in their free-swimming larvae. Sea squirts are the examples of
Urochordata.
ii. Subphylum Cephalochordata includes the invertebrate chordates in which notochord
persists throughout life. Amphioxus is a common cephalochordate.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 23 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Higher Chordates
Vertebrates: They have a vertebral column and cranium. Vertebrates are divided into seven
classes which are placed into two groups.
CLASSIFICATION OF VERTEBRATES
Q17. Describe the basic characteristics of group Pisces.
Ans. Basic characteristics of group pisces are as follows:
1. Habitat: Members of Class Pisces are aquatic vertebrates, meaning they live exclusively
in freshwater or marine environments.
2. Streamlined Body: Their bodies are streamlined or fusiform (spindle-shaped) which
helps in reducing water resistance during swimming.
3. Scales: The body is covered with scales (dermal in origin), such as placoid, cycloid or
ctenoid scales, depending on the type of fish.
4. Skeleton: Skeleton can be cartilaginous (as in sharks and rays) or bony (as in most
modern fish).
5. Respiratory System: Respiration takes place through gills. Gills are usually covered by
an operculum in bony fishes.
6. Circulatory System: They have a closed circulatory system. The heart is two-chambered
(one auricle and one ventricle). Blood circulation is single and incomplete.
7. Fins: Locomotion is achieved with the help of paired and unpaired fins. Fins also
provide balance and direction during swimming.
8. Reproduction: Mostly are oviparous (egg-laying), but some are viviparous (give birth to
young ones). Fertilisation may be external (common in bony fishes) or internal (common in
cartilaginous fishes).
9. Ectothermic: Pisces are ectothermic (cold-blooded), meaning their body temperature
varies with the environment.

Lungfish
Seahorse
Rohu
Trout
Spinal cord
Dorsal fin
Stomach
Swim bladder
Kidney
Brain
Caudal fin
Eye
Nostril
Operculum
(partially cut)
Gills
Urinary bladder
Heart
Intestine
Anus
Liver
Anal fin
Pelvic fin
Gonad
Fig: Representative fishes and general structure

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 24 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

| Class | Key Characteristics | Examples |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Agnathans (Jawless Fishes) | Class Myxini | Mouth with four pairs of tentacles; five to fifteen pair of pharyngeal slits. | Hagfish |
| | Class Cephalaspidomorphi | Sucking mouth, seven pair of pharyngeal slits | Lamprey |
| Gnathostomes (Jawed Fishes) | Class Chondrichthyes | Cartilaginous skeleton, tail fin with large upper lobe and lack swim bladder or lungs. | Sharks, skates ratfish |
| | Class Osteichthyes | Bony skeleton, pneumatic sac function as lungs or swim bladder. | Lungfish, Coelacanths |

Q18. Describe the common traits of Class Amphibia.
Ans. Common traits of Class Amphibia
It is the first class of tetrapods.
1. Skeleton: They have bony endoskeleton. Unlike fishes, amphibians have a neck. The first
vertebra (cervical vertebra) moves
against the back of skull and
allows the skull to nod vertically.
2. Skin: Their skin is smooth
(without scales) and moist. It helps
in gas exchange, temperature
regulation, and absorption and
storage of water.
3. Heart: Their heart is double-
circuit. It is three-chambered,
with two atria and one ventricle.
4. Respiration: They respire by gills
in the larval stage and by lungs and
skin in the adult stage.
5. Ectotherms: They depend on external heat source and so are ectotherms. They cannot
regulate their body temperature and cannot maintain it constant, so, they are poikilothermic
animals and hibernate in winter.
6. Examples: Salamander, newts, and mud puppies are tailed amphibians. Frogs and toads
are tail-less amphibians, and caecilians are legless amphibians.
7. Reproductive System: Amphibians are unisexual. Fertilization is usually external.
Q19. Discuss the common characteristics of reptiles.
Ans. Common traits of Class Reptiles
1. Amniotic Eggs: Reptiles are the first animal group that possess amniotic eggs.
2. Extra-Embryonic membranes: Amniotic eggs make protective extra-embryonic
membranes i.e., amnion, allantois, and chorion. These membranes protect the embryo from
drying out, nourish it and enable it to develop on land.
3. Food: The amniotic eggs also contain a large amount of yolk, the primary food supply for
the embryo. Such eggs have abundant albumin, which provides additional nutrients and
water.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 25 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM
4. Shell: The amniotic eggs are also covered with leathery calcareous shell which is partly
permeable to gases but not to water.
Chorion
Yolk sac
Allantois
Turtle
Cobra
Tuatara
Amnion
Shell
Embryo
Crocodile
Fig: Amniotic egg
Fig: Representative reptiles
5. Skin: Reptiles have dry scaly skin.
6. Endoskeleton: The bony endoskeleton of reptiles is harder than amphibians. The skull is
longer than amphibians. In reptiles, first two cervical vertebrae (atlas and axis) allow more
movements of head.
7. Heart: In their heart, ventricle is incompletely partitioned, into left and right ventricles.
8. Thermoregulation: Reptiles, like amphibians, are ectothermic and use external heat
source for thermoregulation. They cannot keep their body temperature at constant, and are
poikilotherms.
9. Fertilization: Fertilization is internal, and are oviparous (egg-laying).
10. Examples: The present- day reptiles are lizards, snakes, tuatara and crocodiles.
Q20. Explain in detail the specific traits which belong to all Aves (birds).
Ans. Common traits of Class Aves
1. Feathers
Birds have a covering of feathers on the body. Feathers form the flight surfaces that provide
lift and aid in steering. Feathers also prevent heat and water loss.
2. Thermoregulation
Birds are endotherms. It means that they can obtain heat from cellular processes. A source
of internal heat allows them to maintain a nearly constant core temperature. The animals
who can maintain their core temperature are known as homeotherms.
3. Body Plan
The body of birds is streamlined and spindle
shaped. The forelimbs are modified into wings.
Their bones are light due to large air spaces. The
sternum (chest bone) bears a large bone called
keel for the attachment of flight muscles.
4. Digestive System
In many birds a diverticulum of the oesophagus,
called crop, is a storage structure that allows
birds to quickly ingest large quantities of food. A
Insect and
seed eater
Seed eater
Insect eater
Fig: Bills and tongues are modified
for a variety of feeding habits and
food sources
REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 26 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

region of stomach, called gizzard, has muscular walls to crush food.
5. Heart: Their heart is four chambered, with complete separation of atria and ventricles,
and have right aortic arch.
6. Nervous System: Birds have well developed nervous system. Vision and hearing are
important senses for most birds.
7. Respiration
Their external nares open in pharynx through nasal passage ways. The pharynx leads to
trachea and then bronchi. The organ of voice, called syrinx, is situated at the lower end of
trachea. The bronchi lead to a complex
system of air sacs that occupy much of the
body and even extend to some of the bones.
The air sacs connect to lungs, which are
made of small air tubes called parabronchi.
8. Bills
A lighter sheath called bill replaces the
teeth. Bills and tongues are modified for a
variety of feeding habits and food sources.
9. Fertilization
In birds, fertilization is internal and
development is external i.e.. they are
oviparous.
10. Amniotic eggs: Like reptiles and egg
laying mammals, birds have amniotic eggs
with large amounts of yolk and albumin,
covered with leathery shell.
Fig: Representative birds
11. Running Birds: Some birds have secondarily lost the power of flight and are called running
birds e.g., ostrich, kiwi, rhea, cassowary, and emu.
12. Flying Birds: Most birds can fly, which include pigeon, parrot, crow, eagle, robin etc.
Q21. How mammals are most advanced class of Chordata?
Ans. Advanced traits of Class Mammalia
1. Mammary glands
Mammalia includes the group of vertebrates which are nourished by milk from the
mammary glands of mother, and have hair on their body. Mammary glands are functional
in female mammals.
2. Skin
Mammals have skin glands, developed from epidermis. Sebaceous (oil) glands secrete oily
secretion. Sudoriferous (sweat) glands release watery secretions used in evaporative
cooling.
3. Teeth
Most mammals have two sets of teeth during their lives i.e., milk teeth and permanent teeth.
4. External ear or pinna
External ear or pinna is present. The middle ear has a chain of three bones i.e., malleus,
incus and stapes.

REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 27 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM
5. Thermoregulation
Mammals are endothermic and homoeothermic animals.
6. Heart
They possess four-chambered heart, and have left aortic arch.
7. Diaphragm
They have a muscular diaphragm that separates the coelom into thoracic and abdominal
cavities.
8. Larynx
They have well developed voice apparatus in the form of larynx (with vocal cords) and
epiglottis.
9. Fertilization
In mammals, fertilization is internal.
10. Classification: There are three groups of mammals. They are monotremes, placental
and marsupials.
i. Monotremes are egg-laying mammals that lay eggs in which whole development of their
embryo proceeds. They are oviparous e.g., Duckbill platypus and echidna (spiny anteater).
ii. Marsupials have a pouch (marsupium) on the abdomen of female. These mammals give
birth to immature young ones which complete their development in mothers' pouch.
Opossum, kangaroo and Tasmanian wolf are the examples of such mammals.
Duckbill platypus
Spiny anteater
Fig: Representative egg-laying mammals
Qoul
Kangaroo
Opossum
Fig: Representative pouched mammals
3. Placental mammals are the most advanced mammals. During development, a structure
called placenta, is formed between mother's uterus wall and foetus body. The foetus is
nourished and wastes from foetus are removed through this placenta. They give birth to
young ones i.e. they are viviparous. Dolphin, rat, monkey, bat, elephant and human are
some examples of placental mammals.
[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 28 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Bat
Dolphin
Squirrel
Musk deer
Walrus
Wild boar
Leopard
Fig: Representative eutherians

CLASSIFICATION OF VIRUSES

Q22. Why viruses are not the part of any domain/kingdom?
Ans. Acellularity: Viruses are not considered organisms because they are acellular i.e.,
not made of cells. They lack any of the characteristics of the three domains of life and are not
classified in any domain and kingdom.
Structure of Viruses: A virus consists of nucleic acid (DNA or RNA) surrounded by a
protein coat.
Reproduction: They cannot run any metabolism and depend upon the host cell (including
plants, animals, and bacteria) to replicate and synthesize their proteins.
Classification: Viruses are classified based on several characteristics, including their
genetic material, replication strategy, morphology, and the hosts they infect. The
classification of viruses follows guidelines established by the International Committee on
Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV).
Q23. Write a note on classification of viruses on the basis of host range,
morphology and genetic material.
Ans.
1. Classification on the bases of Host Range
i. Animal Viruses: Infect animals, including humans. Examples: Influenza virus, Rabies
virus.
ii. Plant Viruses: Infect plants e.g., Tobacco mosaic virus, Potato virus X.
iii. Bacteriophages: Infect bacteria e.g., T4 phage, Lambda phage.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 29 ---
iv. Archaea Viruses: Infect archaea e.g., Sulfolobus spindle-shaped virus.
2. Classification on the basis of Morphology
i. Helical Viruses: These have a capsid with a helical structure surrounding the nucleic acid.
Examples: Tobacco mosaic virus, Rabies virus.
ii. Icosahedral Viruses: These have a capsid with a symmetrical icosahedral shape (having
20 faces).
Examples: Adenoviruses, Herpesviruses.
iii. Complex Viruses: These have a complex structure, often with a combination of
icosahedral and helical features, and sometimes additional structures like tails.
Examples: Bacteriophages (viruses that infect bacteria).
iv. Enveloped Viruses: These have an outer lipid envelope derived from the host cell
membrane, surrounding their capsid.
Examples: Influenza virus, HIV
v. Non-enveloped (Naked) Viruses: These lack an outer lipid envelope and consist only of
a capsid enclosing the nucleic acid.
Examples: Poliovirus, Adenovirus.

Helical Icosahedral Complex Enveloped Non.enveloped
Fig: Basic shapes of viruses

3. Classification on the basis of Genetic Material
i. DNA Viruses: Viruses with DNA as their genetic material. This DNA can be single
stranded (ssDNA) or double-stranded (dsDNA). Examples include:
• dsDNA viruses: Adenoviruses (cause respiratory infections), Herpes viruses (cause
herpes, chickenpox).
• ssDNA viruses: Parvoviruses (cause gastroenteritis).
ii. RNA Viruses: Viruses with RNA as their genetic material. This RNA can be single
stranded (ssRNA) or double-stranded (dsRNA). Examples include:
• ssRNA viruses: Coronaviruses (cause COVID-19), Influenza viruses (cause flu).
• dsRNA viruses: Rotaviruses (cause gastroenteritis).
4. Classification on the basis of Replication Strategy
i. Positive-Sense RNA Viruses: The RNA genome is directly translated into proteins by the
host cell's ribosomes. Examples include Poliovirus, Hepatitis C virus.
ii. Negative-Sense RNA Viruses: The RNA genome is transcribed into mRNA by a viral
RNA polymerase before translation. Examples include Rabies virus, Ebola virus.
iii. Reverse Transcribing Viruses: These viruses replicate through a DNA intermediate
using the enzyme reverse transcriptase. They can have RNA or DNA genomes.

--- Page 30 ---
Examples:
• RNA genome: Retroviruses like HIV (cause AIDS).
• DNA genome: Hepadnaviruses like Hepatitis B virus.
★Q24. Describe the concept of an ecosystem and niche.
Ans. Ecosystem
An ecosystem is a dynamic and interactive system composed of living organisms and their
physical environment. It includes all the biotic factors as well as the abiotic factors.
i. Biotic Components
Biotic components include all living organisms including plants and animals supported by
biosphere. Biosphere is spread out over the surface of the planet earth extending about 8-10
kilometers to the upper reaches of atmosphere and also the same distance into the depths of
oceans.
ii. Abiotic Components
Abiotic components include all non-living components air, water, and soil. In ecological
term they are called as: (a) atmosphere --- (atmo - air, sphere - place) (b) hydrosphere ---
(hydro - water, sphere place) (c) lithosphere --- (litho - earth-soil, sphere place).
Niche
A niche refers to the role or function of an organism or species within an ecosystem. It
includes its habitat, its interactions with other organisms (predation, competition, and
symbiosis), and its role in energy flow within the ecosystem.
Factors
• Ecological niche with habitat also specifies how the organism gets its supply of energy
and materials - for examples organism's predators, prey and competitor as well as its
behaviour and interactions are considered elements of its niche.
• In addition, niche includes all the physical factors of the environment necessary for
survival, such as range of temperature, amount of humidity, the pH of the water and soil.
Q25. Define Biodiversity. Explain the different levels at which biodiversity can
be assessed. How do these levels contribute to our understanding of biological
diversity and conservation efforts?
Ans. Biodiversity
Biodiversity, a term derived from "biological diversity," refers to the variety of life forms
present in different ecosystems, encompassing the diversity of species, genes, and
ecosystems. It represents the richness and variability of living organisms and their
interactions with each other and their environments.
Biodiversity Assessment Levels
The assessment of biodiversity involves multiple levels, each providing unique insights into
the complexity of life.
i. Species Level: At the species level, biodiversity is assessed by identifying and counting
the different species present within a given area. Species diversity includes not only the
number of species but also their relative abundance and distribution.

--- Page 31 ---
By assessing biodiversity at species level helps the biologists to know about the threatened
or endangered species in area of particular study and to take prompt actions to conserve
them.
ii. Genetic Level: At the genetic level, biodiversity refers to the variety of genetic
information contained within all individual organisms of a species. This genetic diversity is
crucial for the adaptability and survival of species, enabling them to cope with
environmental changes and challenges.
Assessment at genetic level helps the biologists in conservation of those species which have
lesser genetic variety, because of fewer genetic variations in a species increases the risk of
extinction.
iii. Ecosystem Level: At this level, biodiversity assessment includes the range of habitats,
from forests and wetlands to grasslands and deserts. It involves understanding how different
ecosystems function and how they contribute to overall ecological health.
It helps the biologists in the protection and conservation of habitats by restoration of
degraded ecosystems and protecting those ecosystems which at risk of being degraded.
Q26. What is random sampling? Discuss the importance of random sampling
methods in ecological studies.
Ans. Random Sampling
Sampling is a method of investigation the abundance and distribution of species and
populations within a given time and in a specific area. There are two different types of
sampling i.e. random and systematic.
In random sampling the location of sampling is selected randomly or due to chance.
Importance of Random Sampling in Determining Biodiversity
Random sampling is a fundamental technique in ecological studies for assessing biodiversity
within a specific area. This method is crucial for several reasons:
1. Minimizes Bias: It ensures that every part of the study area has an equal chance of being
sampled, which provides a more accurate representation of the overall biodiversity.
2. Provides Reliable Estimates: Random sampling allows for the collection of data that can
be statistically analyzed to estimate species richness, abundance, and distribution.
3. Facilitates Comparisons: It enables comparisons between different areas or habitats by
providing standardized methods of data collection.
4. Enhances Representativeness: By covering different parts of the study area, random
sampling ensures that the sample represents the diversity of the entire area.
5. Supports Conservation Efforts: Accurate biodiversity assessments through random
sampling are essential for identifying areas of high conservation value and for monitoring
changes in biodiversity over time.
Q27. Describe the various methods to assess biodiversity and discuss their
importance.
Ans. Methods to Assess Biodiversity
Various methods are employed for assessing the distribution and abundance of organisms in
an area:
Methods to Assess Distribution
1. Quadrat Sampling
It involves dividing the study area into a grid and sampling within randomly selected
squares (quadrats).

--- Page 32 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Importance: This method is particularly useful for studying plant populations or sessile
organisms. For example, in a forest, a researcher might lay out quadrats of a fixed size and
record the presence or absence of each plant species within these quadrats.
2. Transect Sampling
It involves laying out a line or strip (transect) across the study area and recording species
at regular intervals along this line.
Importance: This method is effective for studying the distribution of species across
environments. For example, in a coastal zone, a transect can be laid from the high tide line
to the low tide line, to record the types and abundance of intertidal organisms.
3. Aerial Surveys
Aerial surveys use aircraft or drones to observe and record the distribution of organisms
over large areas.
Importance: For example, it can be used to track the distribution of bird species across a
large wetland area or to monitor large mammal populations in savannas.

Quadrat Sampling                      Transect Sampling                      Aerial Surveys
Fig: Methods to assess distribution of organisms

Methods to Assess Abundance
1. Point Counts: Point counts involve observing and recording the number of individuals of
a species from a fixed point over a specified period. This method is commonly used for birds
and other mobile animals.
2. Mark-Recapture: It involves capturing, marking (by tags, painting, bands), and releasing
individuals of a species, then recapturing them later to estimate population size and density.
This method is useful for animals that are difficult to count directly.
3. Quadrat Counts: In this method, researchers use quadrats to count the number of
individuals of a species within each quadrat and then infer these counts to estimate overall
abundance.
4. Capture-Recapture Methods: These models account for variables such as varying
capture probabilities and movement between areas. This method helps in the estimation of a
population size, where organisms (particularly animals) keep on moving between different
areas.
5. Remote Sensing: Remote sensing uses satellite or drone imagery to assess the
abundance and distribution of species, particularly for large-scale or inaccessible areas.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 33 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

SPECIES AND SPECIATION
Q28. Define species and speciation. Explain the concept of species according to
the biological species concept. How does this definition help in understanding
species boundaries and the process of speciation? Provide examples to illustrate
your points.
Ans. Species
Definition: The term "species" is a fundamental concept in biology A species is generally
defined as a group of individuals that can interbreed and produce fertile offspring under
natural conditions.
Characteristics
• Members of the same species share common characteristics and genetic makeup,
which distinguishes them from individuals of other species.
Identification of species by using physical traits and similarities can sometimes be
problematic due to the existence of cryptic species - organisms that appear similar but
are genetically distinct.
• German-American biologist, Ernst Mayr, emphasized reproductive isolation as the key
criterion. According to this concept, species are groups of interbreeding natural
populations. Members of different species do not typically mate or produce viable. fertile
offspring.
Speciation
Definition: Speciation is the evolutionary process by which new species arise from a
common ancestor. It involves the accumulation of genetic changes that lead to reproductive
isolation between populations.
Mechanisms of Speciation
There are several mechanisms of
speciation, for example:
1. Allopatric Speciation
It occurs when a population is
geographically separated into two or
more isolated groups. These groups
experience different environments and
evolve independently. Over time, the
accumulated differences can become
significant enough to prevent
interbreeding, even if the geographical
barrier is removed.
Example: An example is the speciation
observed in Darwin's finches on the
Galápagos Islands, where different
populations adapted to diverse
environments.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 34 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

2. Peripatric Speciation
It involves a small, isolated population at the edge of a larger population. The small
population undergoes rapid evolutionary changes, leading to divergence from the original
population.
Example: An example can be seen in island species that evolve from a small founding
population.
3. Parapatric Speciation
This occurs when populations are adjacent to each other but occupy different environments
along a gradient. Gene flow between the populations is limited, and they evolve adaptations
to their specific environments. Over time, this can lead to reproductive isolation.
Example: An example is the grass species “Anthoxanthum odoratum”, which exhibits
different adaptations to varying soil conditions across a gradient, leading to reproductive
isolation in different soil types.
4. Sympatric Speciation
In this form, new species arise within the same geographical area without physical
barriers. Sympatric speciation often occurs through mechanisms such as polyploidy (where
an organism has multiple sets of chromosomes) or niche differentiation (where different
subpopulations exploit different resources).
Example: For instance, certain plants can undergo polyploidy, leading to immediate
reproductive isolation and the formation of new species.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch1 Long Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [2/36]: 11th Bio New Ch1 MCQ's.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 1: Biodiversity & Classification

Multiple Choice Questions

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)

1. Which domain of life is characterized
by organisms that often inhabit
extreme environments and have cell
membranes with ether-linked lipids?

(a) Bacteria (b) Archaea
(c) Eukarya (d) Protista

2. What is a key difference between the
domains Bacteria and Archaea?

(a) Bacteria have membrane-bound
organelles, while Archaea do not.

(b) Bacterial cell walls have
peptidoglycan, while Archaeal cell
walls do not have it.

(c) Archaea are only found in extreme
environments, while Bacteria are not.

(d) Bacteria are all unicellular, while
Archaea include multicellular
organisms.

3. Which of the following kingdoms
includes organisms that are mostly
unicellular, eukaryotic, and can be
autotrophic or heterotrophic?

(a) Fungi (b) Animalia
(c) Plantae (d) Protoctista

4. In which kingdom are organisms
predominantly multicellular, autotrophic,
and have cell walls made of cellulose?

(a) Animalia (b) Fungi
(c) Plantae (d) Protoctista

5. Which of the following criteria is
commonly used to classify viruses?

(a) Their ability to cause specific
diseases
(b) The type of nucleic acid they contain
(c) The colour of the virus particles
(d) Their mode of transmission

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
6. Which virus group includes viruses such
as Coronaviruses and influenza viruses?
(a) Double-stranded DNA viruses
(b) Single-stranded DNA viruses
(c) Double-stranded RNA viruses
(d) Single-stranded RNA viruses
7. At which level of biodiversity
assessment do we evaluate the variety
of different species within a particular
habitat or ecosystem?
(a) Genetic diversity
(b) Ecosystem diversity
(c) Species diversity
(d) Functional diversity
8. Which method is best suited for assessing
the distribution of species across a
gradient of environmental conditions
within a single geographical area?
(a) Quadrat Sampling
(b) Point Counts
(c)Transect Sampling
(d) Remote Sensing

9. Which of the following statements is
true regarding the concept of a
species?
(a) A species is always defined by its
physical characteristics alone.
(b) Different species can interbreed and
produce fertile offspring.
(c) Members of the same species are
reproductively isolated from
members of other species.
(d) The concept of a species can be
defined solely based on genetic
similarity.
10. What type of speciation occurs when
populations are geographically
separated by a physical barrier?
(a) Sympatric Speciation
(b) Parapatric Speciation
(c) Allopatric Speciation
(d) Peripatric Speciation

SLO BASED MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS

Three-Domain System of
Classification
11. Who suggested that there are the
separate groups of prokeryotes?
(a) Robert Whittaker
(b) Carl Woese
(c) F. Sanger
(d) Frederich Meischer
12. Domains suggested by Carl Woese in
a 1990 includes.
(a) Domain Archaea
(b) Domain Bacteria
(c) Domain Eukarya
(d) All of above
13. Individual archaeans range from
0.1µm to over ………. In diameter.
(a) 10µm
(b) 15µm
(c) 20µm
(d) 25µm

14. The archaeans which form aggregates
or filaments ………. in length.
(a) -100µm
(b) 125µm
(c) 150µm
(d) 200µm
15. The cell membranes of archaea
contain lipids with ………. between
glycerol and fatty acid chains.
(a) Glycosidic linkage
(b) Peptide bond
(c) Ether linkage
(d) Ester linkage
16. The lipids in the cell membranes of
bacteria and eukarya have fatty acids
attached to glycerol by ……….
(a) Ester linkage
(b) Glyosidic linkage
(c) Phospho-diester linkage
(d) Ether linkage

--- Page 3 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

17. Which of the following is not present
    in the cell walls of archaea?
    (a) Polysaccharides
    (b) Proteins
    (c) Peptidoglycan
    (d) Both (a) and (b)
18. The archaeans which are vital part of
    sewage treatment are:
    (a) Methanogens
    (b) Halobacteria
    (c) Thermococci
    (d) Thaumarchaeota
19. Which process is the sole property of
    archaeans that bacteria and eukarya
    do not have?
    (a) Photosynthesis
    (b) Methanogenesis
    (c) Cellular respiration
    (d) Nitrogen fixation
20. Which one of the following does not
    belong to archaea?
    (a) Firmicutes    (b) Methanogens
    (c) Thermococci   (d) Halobacteria
21. The structure in bacteria that helps in
    genetic diversity and adaptation is:
    (a) Flagella      (b) Pili
    (c) Fimbriae      (d) Plasmids
22. The extremophiles which can thrive in
    low pH are called:
    (a) Thermophiles  (b) Halophiles
    (c) Acidophiles   (d) All of these
23. E.coli and Helicobacter pylori belongs
    to which group of domain bacteria:
    (a) Proteobacteria
    (b) Firmicutes
    (c) Cyanobacteria
    (d) Acidobacteria
24. Which one of the following belongs to
    Aquificae group of bacteria?
    (a) Treponema pallidum
    (b) Acidobacterium
    (c) Streptomyces
    (d) Aquifex pyrophilus

25. The structure that facilities
    intracellular transport in eukaryans is:
    (a) Cytoskeleton    (b) ER
    (c) Golgi apparatus (d) Peroxisomes
26. The organelles of symbiotic origin are:
    (a) Mitochondria & chloroplast
    (b) Nucleus and mitochondria
    (c) Chloroplast and RER
    (d) Lysosomes and mitochondria
    Taxonomic Hierarchy
27. The highest level of classification
    among all living organisms is:
    (a) Kingdom         (b) Phylum
    (c) Class           (d) Domain
28. The rank of taxonomic hierarchy in
    which organisms share a basic body
    plane and significant structural
    features is:
    (a) Domain          (b) Phylum
    (c) Class           (d) Order
29. In taxonomic hierarchy, the most
    specific level of classification is:
    (a) Species         (b) Genus
    (c) Family          (d) Order
30. Sparrow belongs to class:
    (a) Mammalia        (b) Aves
    (c) Reptilia        (d) Amphibia
    Salient features of kingdoms of
    domain Eukarya
31. Amoebic dysentery is caused by a
    parasite:
    (a) Plasmodium
    (b) Entamoeba histolytica
    (c) Trypanosoma
    (d) Giant amoeba
32. Select the organism on the basis of features
    given heterotrophic (does not ingest food)
    cell wall made of a polysaccharide,
    unicellular or multicellular:
    (a) Mushroom        (b) Fern
    (c) Lion            (d) Euglena

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 4 ---
33. Which of the following lacks
conducting (xylem and phloem), no
seed production and no flowers?
(a) Hornwort (b) Cedrus
(c) Capsicum (d) Mustard
Kingdom Animalia
34. Venus flower basket is the common
name for:
(a) Leucosolenia (b) Spongilla
(c) Euplectella (d) Sycon
35. The layer of sponges which contains
ameboid cells and is jelly-like is called:
(a) Pinacoderm (b) Choanoderm
(c) Mesohyle (d) Epidermis
36. Identify the cnidarian which can move
freely:
(a) Hydra (b) Coral
(c) Obelia (d) Jelly fish
37. Nematocysts are the structures of
defence and nutrition in:
(a) Cnidarians (b) Sponges
(c) Annelids (d) Nematodes
38. Polyps are cylindrical have functions
in nutrition and are attached to the
substrate at the:
(a) Oral end (b) Aboral end
(c) Lateral end (d) Cephalic end
39. Recognize the animal on the basis of
information given below:
Lack respiratory and circulatory
systems, tubular protonephridia
cerebral ganglia in head and
reproduce asexually by fission
(a) Sea anemone
(b) Tapeworm
(c) Roundworm
(d) Segmented worm
40. Which one of the following animal is
pseudocoelomate?
(a) Planaria (b) Ascaris
(c) Liver fluke (d) Tapeworm

41. Select the class which does not belongs
to Mollusca:
(a) Class arachnida
(b) Class gastropoda
(c) Class bivalvia
(d) Class cephalopoda
42. All molluscs have a rasping tongue-
like organ called radula except:
(a) Gastropods (b) Bivalvia
(c) Cephalopoda (d) Both (a) and (c)
43. The segmented worm found in marine
waters is:
(a) Nereis (b) Leech
(c) Earthworm (d) Lumbricus
44. The excretory system of annelids
consists of ciliated, funnel shaped
tubular structure called:
(a) Protonephridia
(b) Nephridia
(c) Nephron
(d) Metanephridia
45. Pulsating blood vessels (pseudo-
hearts) closed type circulatory system,
respiratory pigment hemoglobin are
the characteristics of:
(a) Sponges
(b) Round worms
(c) Segmented worms
(d) Flat worms
46. The arthropods have an exoskeleton
or cuticle which is secreted by the
__________ of body wall:
(a) Exocuticle (b) Epidermis
(c) Gastrodermis (d) Endocuticle
47. Tagmata is the characteristic feature
of:
(a) Echinoderms (b) Annelids
(c) Arthropods (d) Molluscs
48. Which one of the following is a
crustacean?
(a) Crayfish (b) Spider
(c) Wasp (d) Centipede

--- Page 5 ---
49. Following are the classes of
arthropods except:
(a) Myriapoda (b) Arachnida
(c) Crustacea (d) Gastropoda
50. Following animals are exclusively
marine:
(a) Echinoderms (b) Arthropods
(c) Molluscs (d) Annelids
51. In echinoderms the calcareous
endoskeleton in the form of plates
called ossicles are derived from:
(a) Ectoderm (b) Mesoderm
(c) Endoderm (d) Pinacoderm
52. Which of the following is NOT a
characteristics of nematodes?
(a) Unsegmented body
(b) Closed circulatory system
(c) Complete digestive system
(d) Pseudocoelom
53. Which of the following is a free living
nematode?
(a) Ascaris (b) Hookworm
(c) Caenorhabditis (d) Pin worm
54. Nematodes possess a nervous system
that includes:
(a) Ganglia in each segment
(b) A well developed brain
(c) a dorsal nerve cord
(d) A nerve ring and four longitudinal
nerve cords
55. Nematodes are pseudocoelomates
because they:
(a) Lack a body cavity
(b) Have a false-body cavity not-lined by
mesoderm
(c) Have a true coelom
(d) Exhibit radial symmetry
56. The excretory system of nematodes is
made up of:
(a) Malpighian tubules
(b) Nephridia
(c) Renette cells
(d) Flame cells

57. Annelids have circulatory system:
(a) Open (b) Closed
(c) Absent (d) Reduced
58. Which of the following is a
hermaphroditic annelid?
(a) Nereis (b) Earthworm
(c) Leech (d) both (b) and (c)
59. The annelids which lack setae is:
(a) Earthworm (b) Leech
(c) Polychaete (d) Nereis
60. Metameric segmentation in annelids
refers to:
(a) Ability to regenerate its lost parts
(b) Presence of jointed appendages
(c) Presence of notochord
(d) Division of body into similar
segments
61. The mantle in molluscs secrete the
following structure:
(a) Radula (b) Gills
(c) Foot (d) Shell
62. Squids and octopuses belong to which
class of mollucs?
(a) Gastropoda (b) Cephalopoda
(c) Bivalvia (d) Polychaetae
63. Excretion in molluscs is carried out
by:
(a) Malpighian tubules
(b) Protonephridia
(c) Flame cells
(d) Nephridia
64. Radula or rasping-tongue in molluscs
is primarily used for:
(a) Locomotion (b) Filtering
(c) Feeding (d) Excretion
65. Which of the following echinoderm is
known for its ability to regenerate its
lost / cut arms?
(a) Brittle star (b) Sea cucumber
(c) Cake urchin (d) Sea-urchin

--- Page 6 ---
66. Which of the following is not a
characteristic feature of echinoderms?
(a) Deuterostome development
(b) Tube-feet
(c) Open circulatory system
(d) Calcareous endoskeleton
67. The madreporite in echinoderms is
the part of .......... system:
(a) Excretory
(b) Nervous
(c) Reproductive
(d) Water vascular system
68. The adults of Echinodermata exhibit
.......... symmetry:
(a) Radial (b) Bilateral
(c) Spherical (d) Both (a) and (b)
69. The water vascular system in
echinoderms is basically used for:
(a) Locomotion (b) Reproduction
(c) Excretion (d) Respiration
70. Which one of the following arthropod
respires through tracheal tubes?
(a) Prawn (b) Crab
(c) Spider (d) Lobster
71. The excretory structures in
arthropods is:
(a) Crop
(b) Gizzard
(c) Mesenteron
(d) Malpighian tubules
72. The process of shedding old exoskeleton
and forming new exoskeleton of large size
in arthropods is termed as:
(a) Metamorphosis (b) Regeneration
(c) Ecdysis (d) Reproduction
73. The exoskeleton of arthropods is
primarily composed by:
(a) Silica (b) Calcium carbonate
(c) Chitin (d) Cellulose

74. The unique and distinguishing
characteristics of arthropods is:
(a) Closed type of circulatory system
(b) Flame cells
(c) Radial symmetry
(d) Jointed appendages
75. Which of the following is a common
derived characteristic of all chordates
at some stage of their life cycle?
(a) Amniotic egg
(b) Vertebral column
(c) Radial symmetry
(d) Post-anal tail
76. The tubular nerve cord in chordates is
present:
(a) Lateral walls of pharynx
(b) Near the throat
(c) Dorsal to notochord
(d) Ventral to reproductive system
77. In urochordates the notochord is present:
(a) In adult stage
(b) Only in larval stage
(c) Throughout life
(d) Lack in all stages
78. Which class of fishes do not have jaws
and possess cartilaginous endoskeleton?
(a) Cyclostomata (b) Chondrichthyes
(c) Osteichthyes (d) Both (b) and (c)
79. Sharks are different from other class
of fishes because they:
(a) Possess internal fertilization
(b) Possess external fertilization
(c) Possess swim bladder
(d) Lack placoid scales
80. The swim bladder in bony fishes
(osteichthyes) is used for:
(a) Digestion (b) Excretion
(c) Predation (d) Buoyancy
81. Which of the following is not a bony
fish?
(a) Rohu (b) Trout
(c) Seahorse (d) Ray fish

--- Page 7 ---
82. The evolution of amniotic eggs was
important for vertebrates because it:
(a) Allowed for external fertilization
(b) Enabled colonization of terrestrial
habitats
(c) Reduced dependence on gills for
respiration
(d) Is required for predation
83. Which of the following does not
belongs to amphibians?
(a) Four-chambered heart
(b) External fertilization
(c) Moist skin
(d) Metamorphosis
84. The evolution of three chambered
heart in amphibians resulted in:
(a) Complete separation of oxygenated
and deoxygenated blood
(b) Double circuit circulation
(c) Reduced efficacy of gaseous
exchange
(d) Both (a) and (c)
85. The feature absent in chondrichthyes
but present in osteichthyes is:
(a) Cartilaginous endoskeleton
(b) Paired fins
(c) Dermal scales
(d) Swim bladder
86. Reptiles are different from
amphibians in that reptiles:
(a) Have gills throughout their life
(b) Lay anamniotic eggs
(c) Lay amniotic eggs
(d) Have four limbs
87. Which of the following is not a present
day reptile?
(a) Crocodiles (b) Tuatra
(c) Snakes (d) Salamander
88. In many birds there is a storage
structure that allows birds to quickly
ingest large quantities of food, it is:
(a) Gizzard (b) Crop
(c) Syrinx (d) Air sac

89. The birds which have secondarily lost
their power of flight are called:
(a) Running birds (b) Flying birds
(c) Diving birds (d) Predatory birds
90. Which one of the following is a
running bird?
(a) Parrot (b) Crow
(c) Robin (d) Emu
91. The adaptation in birds is a large
bone, which allows attachment of
major flight muscles, it is called:
(a) Keel (b) Scapula
(c) Suprascapular (d) Humans
92. If a vertebrate animal has a dry, scaly
skin and lays leathery shelled eggs it
most likely belongs to class:
(a) Amphibia (b) Reptilia
(c) Aves (d) Mammalia
93. The characteristics feature shared by
amphibians and reptiles, but not by
the birds is:
(a) Amniotic eggs
(b) Feathers
(c) Ectothermy
(d) Two chambered heart
94. Mammals include group of
vertebrates which are nourished by
milk from ......... glands of mother:
(a) Endocrine (b) Mammary
(c) Memory (d) Prostate
95. Which one of the following mammal is
a marsupial?
(a) Duck bill platypus
(b) Quoll
(c) Spiny ant-eater
(d) Horse
96. The mammals which lay eggs in which
whole development of the embryo
proceeds are called:
(a) Marsupials
(b) Placental
(c) Metatherians
(d) Egg-laying mammals

--- Page 8 ---
97. Which gland secretes sweat in
mammals?
(a) Sebaceous gland
(b) Prostate gland
(c) Pineal gland
(d) Sudoriferous gland

Classification of viruses
98. Viruses are not considered organisms
because they:
(a) Are acellular
(b) Cause disease
(c) Cannot be seen with naked eye
(d) Live in water
99. A Plant virus with a helical capsid is:
(a) Tobacco mosaic virus
(b) Adenovirus
(c) Herpes virus
(d) HIV
100. A researcher studying COVID-19
virus would classify it as a:
(a) ss RNA virus
(b) ss DNA virus
(c) ds DNA virus
(d) ds RNA virus
101. The viruses which lack an outer
lipid envelope and consists only of a
capsid enclosing the nucleic acid are
called:
(a) Non-enveloped viruses
(b) Enveloped viruses
(c) Naked viruses
(d) Both (a) and (c)
102. Gastroenteritis is caused by:
(a) Parvoviruses (b) Adenoviruses
(c) Rotaviruses (d) Both (a) and (c)
103. The viruses in which RNA genome
is directly translated into proteins by
the host cells ribosomes are called:
(a) Positive sense RNA viruses
(b) Negative sense RNA viruses
(c) Reverse transcribing viruses
(d) All of them
104. Reverse transcribing viruses like
HIV are unique because they:
(a) Lack a protein capsid
(b) Infect bacteria
(c) Convert RNA into DNA
(d) Convert DNA into RNA
Biodiversity
105. Role or function of an organism or
species with in an ecosystem refers to:
(a) Niche (b) Alcove
(c) Slot (d) Recess
106. Mark-recapture method is
particularly used for:
(a) Estimating abundance of easily
observable species
(b) Counting species in quadrats
(c) Studying animals that are difficult to
count directly
(d) Mapping large-scale distributions
107. Ernst Mayr's definition of species
emphasizes:
(a) Reproductive isolation in natural
populations
(b) Shared habitat preferences
(c) Identical DNA sequences
(d) Morphological similarities
108. Sympatric speciation differs from
allopatric speciation because it:
(a) Requires geographical isolation
(b) Is driven only by mutation rates
(c) Involves only small populations
(d) Occurs through niche differentiation
or polyploidy without physical barriers
109. Which of the following is an
example of Peripatric speciation?
(a) Grasses adapting to soil gradients
(b) Reproductive isolation of grasses
(c) Undergoing polyploidy isolation
(d) Island species that evolve from a
small founding population

--- Page 9 ---
110. The remote sensing method uses:
(a) Satellite or drone imagery
(b) Quadrates to count
(c) Observations and recording from a
fixed point
(d) Marking and recapturing

ANSWER KEY
1. b 2. b 3. d 4. c 5. b 6. d 7. c 8. c 9. c 10. c
11. b 12. d 13. b 14. d 15. c 16. a 17. c 18. a 19. b 20. a
21. d 22. c 23. a 24. d 25. a 26. a 27. d 28. b 29. a 30. b
31. b 32. a 33. a 34. c 35. c 36. d 37. a 38. b 39. b 40. b
41. a 42. b 43. a 44. d 45. c 46. b 47. c 48. a 49. d 50. a
51. b 52. b 53. c 54. d 55. b 56. c 57. b 58. d 59. b 60. d
61. d 62. b 63. d 64. c 65. a 66. c 67. d 68. a 69. a 70. c
71. d 72. c 73. c 74. d 75. d 76. c 77. b 78. a 79. a 80. d
81. d 82. b 83. a 84. b 85. d 86. c 87. d 88. b 89. a 90. d
91. a 92. b 93. c 94. b 95. b 96. d 97. d 98. a 99. a 100. a
101. d 102. d 103. a 104. c 105. a 106. c 107. a 108. d 109. d 110. a

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch1 MCQ's.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [3/36]: 11th Bio New Ch1 Short Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM
Unit 1: Biodiversity & Classification
Short Questions
SHORT QUESTION ANSWERS (EXERCISE)
Q1. What are the three domains of
life and how do they differ in terms of
cellular structure?
Ans. Three Domains of Life
• In 1990, American microbiologist Carl
Woese classified living organisms into
three domains i.e., domain Archaea,
domain Bacteria and domain Eukarya.
• According to his three-domain system,
domain Archaea and domain Bacteria
contain prokaryotes but they differ in a
number of features.
Cell structure
i. Archaea: They are prokaryotes, lacking
membrane bounded organelles and true
nucleus. Their cell membrane contains
lipids with ether-linkage between
glycerol and fatty acid chains.
ii. Bacteria: Like archaea, bacteria possess
prokaryotic cell i.e., lack a true nucleus
and membrane-bound organelles. Cell
membrane have lipids with fatty acids
attached to glycerol by ester linkages.
iii. Eukarya: They possess eukaryotic cells -
with true nucleus enclosed by a nuclear
membrane. Cells have membrane-
bounded organelles e.g., mitochondria,
chloroplasts.
Q2. Describe one key feature that
differentiates Archaea from Bacteria.
Ans. Key feature: A key feature
differentiating Archaea from Bacteria is the
structure of their cell walls. The cell walls of
archaea lack cellulose and peptidoglycan.
Instead, they
contain
distinct
polysaccharides and proteins. Some archaea
have pseudopeptidoglycan.
On the other hand, bacterial cell walls
contain peptidoglycan, a polymer consisting
of sugars and amino acids that provides
structural support.
REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 2 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q3. Which kingdom is characterized by organisms with chitin in their cell walls and that are mostly decomposers?
Ans. Kingdom fungi is characterized by organisms which possess chitin (a polysaccharide) in their cell walls. They are called decomposers as they follow absorptive mode of nutrition and do not ingest food like other animals.
Examples: mushrooms, rusts, smuts and molds.
Q4. What type of speciation occurs when populations are geographically separated?
Ans. Allopatric speciation occurs when populations are geographically separated. These groups experience different environments and evolve independently. Over time, the accumulated differences can become significant enough to prevent interbreeding, even if the geographical barrier is removed.
Example: Speciation observed in Darwin's finches on the Galápagos Islands, where different populations adapted to diverse environments.
Q5. What is the role of genetic drift in the process of speciation?
Ans. Genetic drift means change in the frequency of alleles at a locus in small
population that occurs by chance. It plays important role in speciation by causing genetic divergence and creating new species.
Q6. What is the primary method used to assess species distribution along an environmental gradient?
Ans. Transect sampling is the primary and effective method used to assess species distribution across different conditions. It involves laying out a line or strip (transect) across the study area and recording species at regular intervals along this line.
Example: In a coastal zone, a transect can be laid from the high tide line to the low tide line, to record the types and abundance of intertidal organisms.
Q7. Which level of biodiversity assessment involves evaluating the variety of ecosystems in a region?
Ans. Ecosystem level involves in evaluation of variety of ecosystems in a region. Because at this level, biodiversity assessment includes the range of habitats, from forests and wetlands to grasslands and deserts. It involves understanding how different ecosystems function and how they contribute to overall ecological health.

SLO BASED SHORT QUESTION ANSWERS
Three Domain System
★Q8. Define phylogeny. Define and draw phylogenetic tree.
Ans. Phylogeny: The evolutionary relationship among the organisms is called phylogeny.
Phylogenetic tree: The diagram which shows phylogeny is called phylogenetic tree or also termed as evolutionary tree.

Domain Bacteria                                Domain Eukarya
                                Domain Archaea
                                     / \
                                    /   \
                                   /     \
                                  /       \
                                 /         \
                                /           \
                          Common Ancestor

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 3 ---
Q9. Why did Carl Woese proposed
the three-domain system and how does
it differs from Whittaker’s five
kingdom system?
Ans. Woese proposed the three-domain
system based on molecular evidence
showing that prokaryotes are not a
monophyletic group rather there are two
separate groups of prokaryotes i.e. Archea
and Bacteria.
Unlike Whittaker’s five-kingdom system
(which grouped all prokaryotes into
Monera). Woese divided prokaryotes in two
separate domains with Eukarya as the third
domain.
Q10. What molecular evidence
suggests that Archaea are more closely
related to Eukarya than to Bacteria?

Ans. Evidences: Archaea share genetic
sequences and the regulatory mechanisms
with Eukarya, which are absent in Bacteria.
This genetic similarity indicates that
Archaea are more closely related to Eukarya
than to Bacteria.
Q11. Define Domain. List the three
domains suggested by Carl Woese.

Ans. Domain: In biological taxonomic
hierarchy, the highest rank/ level of
classification is termed as Domain (also
called super kingdom).
In 1990 American microbiologist Carl
Woese suggested that there are two separate
groups of Prokaryotes, and classified living
organisms into three domains.
i. Domain Archea
ii. Domain Bacteria
iii. Domain Eukarya

Q12. Describe the size range and
reproduction in domain Archaea.

Ans. Individual archaeans: range from
0.1 µm to 15µm in diameter, some form
aggregates or filament upto 200 µm in
length.
Reproduction: Archea reproduce asexually
by binary or multiple fission, fragmentation
or budding. Mitosis and meiosis don’t occur
in archaea.
Q13. Compare the cell membrane of
Archaea with bacteria and eukarya.

Ans. Cell Membrane
• The cell membrane of archaeans contain
lipids with ether linkage between glycerol
and fatty acid chains. While that of
eukaryans and bacterial membrane lipids
with ester-linkages between glycerol and
fatty acid chains.
• Archaean fatty acid chains branched while
that of eukaryans and bacterial are
unbranched.
Q14. Draw the sketch of Archaean and
Eukaryan membrane lipid.
Ans.
Phosphate group
Ether
linkage
Branched Chain
C-O
C-O
Glycerol
Membrane lipid in Archaea
Unbranched Chain
C-O
C-O
Ether
linkage
Membrane lipid in Bacteria & Eukarya

--- Page 4 ---
Q15. How Archaea differs from Eukarya and Bacteria in cell wall composition?
Ans. Archaean cell wall contain distinct polysaccharides and proteins (lack cellulose and peptidoglycan).
Bacterial cell wall contain peptidoglycan (a polymer consisting of sugars and amino acids that provide structural support).
Eukaryotic cell wall in plants have cellulose and fungi have chitin.
Some archaea have pseudopeptidoglycan (differ from peptidoglycan in having sugars cross-linking patterns).
Q16. State the metabolic differences between Achaea and Eukarya or Bacteria.
Ans. Metabolic differences
• Archaea have unique metabolic processes like methanogenesis (production of methane) not found in bacteria or Eukarya.
• Bacteria exhibit metabolic pathways, including photosynthesis, nitrogen fixation and fermentation.
• Eukarya have more complex metabolic processes including cellular respiration, photosynthesis (in plants and algae), and various forms of fermentation.
★Q17. Discuss the role of different Archaea in the fields of biotechnology, sewage treatment and biomining or bioleaching.
Ans. Biotechnology
The archaeans which live in high acidity and alkalinity are source of enzymes that can function under harsh conditions e.g. enzymes of DNA replication have been extracted from theses archaeans which are used in cloning of DNA (PCR-Polymerase Chain Reaction), these enzymes work best at high temperatures.
Sewage treatment
The methanogen archaeans carry out anaerobic digestion and produce biogas.
Biomining
The acidophilic archaea are used to extract metals such as gold, cobalt and copper from ores.
Q18. Name the four major groups of Archaea, also write their habitats.

Ans. Major groups of Archaea
(i) Methanogens (produce methane as metabolic by-product)
(ii) Halobacteria (live in extremely saline environments)
(iii) Thermococci (found in hot environments)
(iv) Thaumarchaeota (involved in nitrogen cycle)
★Q19. Is there any link between Humans and Archaeans?
Ans. Yes, one of the major groups of Archaea i.e. methanogens are involved in production of intestinal gas leading to abdominal discomfort in humans. These are the part of normal flora of humans.
Q20. What kind of appendages do bacteria have? Write their roles.

Ans. Appendages: Bacteria possess flagella, pili and fimbriae, flagella-whip-like structures that enable locomotion pili-longer hair-like structures in some bacteria that help in conjugation i.e. exchange of genetic material with other bacteria. Fimbriae short hair-like protein appendages on bacterial surfaces, primarily involved in adhesion i.e. providing attachment to surfaces during colonization.

--- Page 5 ---
Q21. What are plasmids? Describe
their structure and how they differ
from bacterial chromosomal DNA?
Ans. Plasmids are extrachromosomal,
small, circular DNA molecules that can be
transferred between bacteria, aiding in
genetic diversity and adaptation, while
chromosomal DNA is a single circular DNA
located in nucleoid region involved in
reproduction.
Q22. Define EXTREMOPHILES and
provide examples of the extreme
conditions in which some bacteria can
thrive.
Ans. Extremophiles are the organisms
including some bacteria that thrive or
growth in extreme environmental
conditions, unsuitable for most life forms.
Examples
(i) Thermophiles: adapted to high
temperature.
(ii) Halophiles: adapted to high salinity
(iii)Acidophiles: can thrive in low PH
(acidic PH).
Q23. What are the similarities
between archaea and bacteria?
Ans. Similarities
(i) Both archaea and bacteria possess
prokaryotic cell, lack a true nucleus
and membrane bound organelles.
(ii) Both possess a single, circular
chromosome composed of DNA, located
in the nucleoid region.
(iii)Both reproduce by asexual method
especially binary fission and
fragmentation.
Q24. Discuss the morphology of
bacteria and archaea.
Ans. Morphology
Archaea occur in various shapes such as
spherical, rod-shape, spiral, lobed or
rectangular. Bacteria exhibit a variety of
shapes. Such as cocci(spherical), bacilli
(rod-shaped), spirilla (spiral shaped) and
vibrios (comma-shaped).
Q25. List major groups of bacteria
with examples.
Ans. Major groups of bacteria
(i) Proteobacteria e.g., Escherichia coli,
Rhizobium, Helicobater pylori
(ii) Firmicutes e.g., Bacillus subtilius,
Lactobacillus, Clostridium botulinum.
(iii) Actino bacteria e.g., Streptomyces,
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(iv) Cyanobacteria e.g., Anabeana, Spiulina
(v) Spirochaetes e.g., Treponema pallidum
(vi) Acido bacteria e.g., Acidobacterium
(vii) Aquificae e.g., Aquifex pyrophilus
Q26. Eukaryotic cell is a highly
organized structure having specialized
organelles how it is functionally
advantageous over prokaryotic cell?
Ans. Organized structures
Eukaryotic cells have true nucleus enclosed
by a nuclear membrane, membrane bounded
organelles e.g., mitochondria (makes cell
energy efficient), chloroplasts (food factory)
golgi apparatus, lysosomes, peroxisomes,
cytoskeleton i.e., complex network of
microtubules, microfilaments and
intermediate filaments that provides
structural support. Enables cell movement
and facilitates intracellular support.
Q27. How the genetic material of
eukaryotic cell is better than
parokaryotic?
Ans. Genetic Material
The DNA of a Eukaryotic cells is organized
into multiple linear chromosomes within the
nucleus. Its DNA is associated with histone
protein, which help in the organization and
regulation of genes.

--- Page 6 ---
Q28. How does eukaryotes reproduce?
Ans. Reproduction
Most eukaryotes undergo sexual reproduction involving meiosis and fertilization leading to great genetic variety. Some eukaryotes can also reproduce asexually through mitosis, producing genetically identical offsprings.
Q29. Describe the evolutionary relationship of eukaryotic cell. How does endosymbiotic theory explains the origin of eukaryotic cells?

Ans. Origin of eukaryotic cells
Eukaryotes are believed to have originated through endosymbiosis where certain prokaryotic cells engulfed by host cells (mitochondria & chloroplast) leading to a symbiotic relationship.
Taxonomic Hierarchy
Q30. Define taxa, taxonomic hierarchy, enlist levels of taxonomic hierarchy starting from highest level.

Ans. Taxonomic hierarchy refers to the system of classifying organisms into categories or groups, to understand the relationship between different forms of life. While each level which represents a rank in the biological classification system or taxonomic hierarchy is termed as taxan (pl-taxa)
Order of taxonomic hierarchy
All organisms → domain → kingdom → phylum → class → order → family → genus → species

Q31. Differentiate between kingdom and phylum.
Ans.
| Kingdom | Phylum |
| :--- | :--- |
| One of the highest taxonomic ranks, just below the domain, which groups together all forms of life that share fundamental characteristics. | The level of classification below kingdom, in which organisms share a basic body plan and significant structural features. |
| e.g. Animalia, plantae, Fungi are different kingdoms. | e.g., in Kingdom Animalia, the phylum chordata includes all animals with a notochord such as mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians & fishes. |

Q32. How organisms are categorized in class and order of taxonomic hierarchy?
Ans. Class
Class divides organisms within a phylum based on more specific common traits e.g. within phylum Chordata, class mammalia includes all mammals or animals, which are characterized by having hairs and mammary glands.
While order categorizes organisms within a class based on additional shared characteristics and evolutionary history e.g. within class mammalia the order primates includes humans, monkeys and apes which are characterized by their large brains and opposable thumbs (a thumb that can be placed opposite the other fingers of hand for secure grip).
Q33. How are genus and species inter-related?
Ans. Species is the most specific basic level of classification representing a single type of organisms which can interbreed and

--- Page 7 ---
produce fertile offsprings e.g. Homo sapiens, sapiens refers to modern humans. On the other hand genus more specific rank within a family, grouping species that are very closely related and often visually similar e.g. within family Hominidae, the genus Homo includes humans and closet extinct relatives (Like Homo habilis, Homo erectus).
Q34. Write down the taxonomic hierarchy of humans and onions.
Ans.
| Domain | Eukarya | Eukarya |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Kingdom | Animalia | Plantae |
| Phylum | Chordata | Tracheophyta Angiosperms |
| Class | Mammalia | Monocots |
| Order | Primates | Asparagales |
| Family | Hominidae | Amaryllidaceae |
| Genus | Homo | Allium |
| Species | Homo Sapiens | Allium cepa |

Q35. Write down the biological classification of sparrow.
Ans.
| Domain | Eukarya |
| :--- | :--- |
| Kingdom | Animalia |
| Phylum | Chordata |
| Class | Aves |
| Order | Passeriformes |
| Family | Passeridae |
| Genus | Passer |
| Species | Passer domesticus |

Salient Features of Kingdom of Domain Eukarya
Q36. Describe the salient features of kingdom Protista, enlist their major groups.
Ans. Salient Features
Kingdom Protista includes eukaryotes which are unicellular, colonial, filamentous or simple multicellular organisms. (that do not have specialized multicellular sex organs).
Major Groups
1. Animal like protists (protozoans) e.g. paramecium, amoeba, plasmodium, trypanosome.
2. Plant like protists (algae) e.g. euglena, diatoms.
3. Fungi like protists myxomycota (slime molds) and oomycota (water molds).
Q37. Write a short note on major protists.
Ans. Group Protozoa
• Includes animal like protists
• They are unicellular and heterotrophic.
• e.g., paramecium. amoeba, plasmodium and trypanosoma.
Group Algae
• Includes plant-like protists
• Cell walls of cellulose
• Have chlorophyll and are autotrophs
• e.g., euglena, diatoms, green algae, brown algae etc.
Group Myxomycota & Oomycota
• Include Fungi like protists
• They have hyphae like structure
• Are saprophytic
• e.g., slime molds (Physarum polycephalum), water molds (Phytophthora infestans)
Q38. Write some important features of kingdom Fungi.
Ans. Important Features
• Fungi are eukaryotic heterotrophic (absorptive) organisms.
• Unicellular or multicellular

--- Page 8 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

• Cells are covered by cell wall made up of
chitin (a polysaccharide)
• Get nutrients in a unique way, they do not
ingest food like animals and protists,
rather absorb food from surroundings.
• Examples include mushrooms, rusts,
smuts, molds, yeasts etc.
Q39. Brief about Major groups of
Fungi.
Ans. Following are the major groups of
fungi.
Zygomycota (Conjugating Fungi)
Includes fungi which lack septa in their
hyphae (aseptate / non-septate / coenocytic
hyphae) examples include Rhizopus (black
bread molds) which grow on moist bread,
fruits etc. Spirobolus (spitting fungus).
Ascomycota (Sac-fungi)
Largest group of fungi
Have spetate hypha (hyphae having septa or
cross walls)

Examples include common molds, morels,
truffles, cup-fungi, neurospora, yeasts.
Basidiomycota (Club-fungi)
Fungi with septate hyphae e.g. mushrooms,
toadstools, puff balls, jelly fungi, bracket /
shelf fungi, rusts and smut fungi.
Q40. Write down the characteristics
and major groups of kingdom plantae.

Ans. Characteristics
Includes plants which are eukaryotic,
multicellular organisms, having cell walls of
cellulose.
• They are autotrophic (photosynthetic)
• Develop from embryos e.g. mosses, ferns,
conifers, angiosperms.
• Plants are divided into two major groups
a) Bryophytes (non-vascular plants)
b) Tracheophytes (vascular plants)

Q41. Differentiate between vascular and non-vascular plants.
Ans.
| Non-vascular plants | Vascular plants |
| :--- | :--- |
| • Called bryophytes | • Called tracheophytes |
| • Lack conducting tissues (xylem & phloem) | • Posses conducting tissues |
| • e.g. liverworts, hornworts, mosses | • e.g. seedless plants (ferns) seed plants (conifers and flowering plants) |

Q42. Discuss the water flow system of
sponges.
Ans. Water flow system
Sponges have two kinds of pores and a
central cavity called spongocoel for filter
feeding and water flow.
Pores
1. Ostia small incurrent pores through
which water enters.
2. Osculum large excurrent pore, through
which water leaves
Spongocoel the central cavity of sponges is
called spongocoel.

Q43. Describe the layers / body
structure of sponges.
Ans. Body structure
Body wall of sponges is made up of three
layers.
• Outer layer-pinacoderm is made up of
thin flat cells called pinacocytes.
• Middle layer-mesohyle is jelly-like layer.
contains ambeboid cells.
• Inner layer-Choanoderm is third layer
which lines the spongocoel, made up of
choanocytes or collar cells.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 9 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q44. Describe reproduction in
sponges. What happens during
unfavourable conditions? / How they
reproduce during unfavourable
conditions?
Ans. Reproduction in sponges
• Sponges reproduce sexually as well as
asexually. But most sponges reproduce
asexually by budding or regeneration.
• Some sponges form resistant capsules
called gemmules, when parent sponge
dies, it releases its gemmules.
On arrival of favourable conditions,
ameboid cells came out of the gemmules
and form a new sponge.
★Q45. How a commercial sponge is
prepared? Also give examples of
common sponges and uses.
Ans. Commercial sponge is prepared by
drying, beating and washing a sponge until
all cells are removed.
They are used in washing, bathing, used in
surgical operations for fluids and blood
absorption, also used for absorption of
sound in building.
Examples: Leucosolenia Spongilla
(Fresh water sponges)
Euplectella (Venus flower basket, marine
sponges)
Q46. What are the key characteristics
of cnidarians that distinguish them
from other phyla?
Ans. Characteristics
Cnidarians are radially symmetrical',
diploblastic animals (with epidermis and
gastro-dermis),
• Possess cnidocytes containing nematocysts for
defense and prey capture.
• They have gastrovascular cavity with single
opening serving as both mouth and anus.

Q47. Compare the digestive systems
of Cnidarians and Platyhelminthes,
why might Platyhelminthes have om
evolutionary advantage?
Ans. Digestive Systems
Cnidarians have a sac-like type digestive
system with one opening, Platyhelminthes
also have sac-type digestive system, but
have branched gastro vascular cavities
allowing better nutrient distribution.
Q48. Describe the general body plan
of cnidarians?
Ans. Body Plan
The adult body of a cnidarian contains two
tissue layers, i.e.
(i) Epidermis (derived from ectoderm)
(ii) Gastrodermis (derived from endoderm)
(iii) Mesoglea: A jelly like mesoglea in
between epidermis and gastrodermis
mesoglea contains amoeboid cells that have
originated either from ectoderm or
endoderm.
Q49. What are nematocysts?
Ans. Nematocysts
Cnidarians possess special cells called
cnidocytes, which contain a special
organelle called nematocysts.
Nematocysts defend the body and enable
cnidarians to capture prey without complete
muscles complementing their simple
digestive system.
Q50. Which body forms are exhibited
by cnidarians?
Ans. 1. Polyps
There are two body forms in cnidarians i.e.
are cylindrical and are attached to a
substrate at the aboral and they reproduce
asexually by budding e.g. hydra.
2. Medusae
Medusae are umbrella like and are free
swimming and use to reproduce sexually as
they possess gonads e.g. jelly fish.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 10 ---
Q51. How flame cells are used to help
in removal of nitrogenous waste in flat
worms?
Ans. Removal of Waste
• Flatworms possess a network of tubular
protonephridia (the excretory apparatus).
These tubules have numerous branches.
Which ends in a bulb-like cell, called
flame cell.
• The cilia of flame cells beat to suck the
interstitial fluid (the fluid present between
cells) and move into the tubules
(excretory ducts).
• The tubules filter waste materials
(nitrogenous waste) from the fluid and
release them out of body wall through an
external opening called nephridiopore.
Q52. Describe the organization of
body wall of flat worms.
Ans. Body Wall of Flat Worms
• Flatworms are triploblastic, acoelomate
(having no body cavity), their tissues are
derived from three embryonic layers,
ectoderm (outer) endoderm (inner lines
the gut) and mesoderm (middle) forming a
loose connective tissue called
parenchyma, which fills space between
the body wall and body organs.
• They possess bilateral symmetry with
distinct left and right sides, as well as
dorsal and ventral sides.
Q53. Name the organisms belonging
to phylum platyhelminthes.
Ans. Following are few examples of flat
worms.
i. Planaria ii. Liver fluke
iii. Tapeworm
Q54. Describe the anatomy of
parasitic round worms.
Ans. Anatomy
The parasitic round worms have excretory
system of protonephridia and two excretory
canals, which unite at the anterior end to
form a single canal which opens outside
through a nephridiopore on ventral surface.
Q55. Write names of some
representative round worms.
Ans. Free living Caenorhabditis elegans,
parasitic ascaris, hookworm, pinwarm
whipworm.
Q56. Elaborate the body structure of
molluscs.
Ans. Body Structure of Molluscs
Molluscs are triploblastic, coelomate
protostomes (the coelomates in which
blastopore form mouth, during embryonic
development) their body is divided into
three parts i.e.
a. Head,
b. Visceral mass (contains organs of
digestion, excretion and reproduction),
c. Muscular foot (for locomotion).
Q57. What is mantle and radula in
molluscs?
Ans. Mantle: Molluscs have an epitherial
envelope around the visceral mass, called as
mantle. The space between mantle and
visceral mass is called mantle cavity. The
outer surface of mantle secretes a calcareous
shell in most of molluscs.
Radula: All molluscs (except bivalvia) have
a rasping tongue like organ called radula.
Which is used to scrap food (macrophageous
type of feeding scraping feeding).
Q58. Briefly describe the
cardiovascular system of molluscs.
Ans. Cardiovascular System
Except cephalopods, all the molluscs have
open type of blood circulatory system where
blood does not retain the vessel and directly
bathes the cells in tissue space. Their heart
consists up of single ventricle and two
auricles.

--- Page 11 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

★Q59. Why some molluscs possess open circulatory system and other molluscs have closed circulatory system?
Ans. Circulatory System
In open-type system, the blood does not retain the vessels, rather it directly bathes cells in tissue spaces (sinus), while the closed type system the blood flows in blood vessels and does not come in direct contact with tissues.
Cephalopod molluscs (octopus, cattle fish) are physically active, so the need more energy continuously that's why they need well maintained blood pressure, which is provided with closed type.
While other molluscs like snails, mussels, gastropods and bivalvia are not so physically active, that's why they need open type with low pressure.
Q60. Classify molluscs with examples.
Ans. There are three classes of molluscs.
1. Class gastropoda – slug, garden snail.
2. Class bivalvia – freshwater mussel, oyster marine water muscle.
3. Class cephalopoda – cuttlefish, octopus.
Q61. Draw the labelled diagram of garden snail showing its anatomy.
Ans.
Intestine
Mantle Coelom Visceral
Stomach mass
Shell Anus Head Eyes
Gill
Lower
tantecle
Mouth
Foot Heart Nerve Radula
cords

★Q62. Define segments in annelids. What is metameric segmentation? Why the annelids have segmented body?
Ans. Segmentation
The body of annelids is divided transversely into a number of parts called segments. These segments are indicated externally by constrictions in the form of little rings (annelid = little ring) and internally the segments are separated by cross walls called septa.
Each segment is provided with its own circulatory, excretory and neural elements, this type of segmentation is called metameric segmentation.
Q63. Enlist the representative animals belonging to annelida with their habitat.
Ans.
1. Nereis (marine water)
2. Leech (Fresh water)
3. Earthworm (damp soil)
Q64. Describe the nervous system of annelids, what type of receptors they possess?
Ans. Nervous System
The annelids possess cerebral ganglion or brain in the anterior segment. A double, longitudinal ventral nerve cord anus from brain and gives branches in each segment. Ganglia are also present in each segment.
Receptors: The annelids being advanced animals possess tactile (touch) receptors, chemoreceptors (which detect chemical concentrations) balance receptors and photo (light) receptors.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 12 ---
Q65. Arthropods possess very hard
exoskeleton, then why they need to
shed it?
Ans. Exoskeleton
Arthropods have exoskeleton or cuticle,
secreted by the epidermis of body wall made
up chitin (Polysaccharide) the young
arthropods can't grow under this hard
exoskeleton, so nature has provided them
with a mechanism called molting or ecdysis
during which the exoskeleton is shed from
time to time.
After shedding the exoskeleton, the animal
grows at a faster rate and then re secretes
new exoskeleton, which is larger than the
previous one.
Q66. What are tagmata? How do
they differ from simple segmentation
in ancestral annelids?
Ans. Tagmata
Tagmata are specialized, fused body regions
(e.g. head, thorax, abdomen) in arthropods
that is thought to be evolved from ancestral
segmentation to enhance the functional
efficiency, unlike the simple and uniform
segments each having its own set of organs.
Q67. Brief about respiratory,
excretory and nervous systems of
arthropods.
Ans.
1. Respiratory System
Consists of air tubes called trachea, the main
tracheal tube opens out through openings
called spiracles, aquatic arthropods respire
through gills.
2. Excretory System
Comprises of Malpaghian tubules these are
narrow tubules projected from alimentary
canal, attached at the junction of midgut and
hindgut. The nitrogenous waster are
excreted in the form of solid aric acid
crystals.
3. Nervous System
A well-developed CNS with three fused
pairs of cerebral ganglia (brain) in head.
There is double ventral nerve which has
ventral ganglia in each segment smaller
nerves arise from ventral ganglia in each
segment.
Q68. Classify arthropods with
examples.
Ans.
1. Class Curstacea
Crayfish, crab, lobsters, prawn, shrimp
2. Class Insecta
Wasp, grasshopper, butterfly, dragonfly,
lady bird, mosquito, wasp.
3. Class Arachnida
Mite, spider, scorpion, tick
4. Class Myriapoda
Centipede, millipede
Q69. What types of symmetry is
possessed by echinoderms?
Ans. Symmetry
Echinoderms are triploblastic deuterostome
coelomates, their larval forms exhibit
bilateral symmetry but their adults show
radial symmetry in which the body parts are
arranged in five or multiples of five around
the oral aboral axis.
Q70. Describe the water-vascular
system of echinoderms.
Ans. Water-Vascular System
The water vascular system consists of tubes and
spaces present in the coelom. A ring canal
surrounds mouth, it opens outside through a
sieve like plate, called madreporite which is
connected to ring canal. From ring canal, there
emerge lateral canals with each lateral canal
ending into tube foot, which are the extensions
of water vascular system. The tube feet extend
and attach with substrate. When water is drawn
back from the sucked tube feet. They contract
and body is pulled.
Q71. Give examples of representative
echinoderms with their body shapes.
Ans.
1. Cake urchin-biscuit shaped

--- Page 13 ---
2. Sea urchin-globular shaped
3. Sea cucumber-elongated body
4. Star fish (sea star)-star shaped with short arms
5. Brittle star-Star shaped with long arms.
Q72. Which unique characteristics are possessed by chordates? Name the diagnostic characters.
Ans. Key Characteristics
Following four characteristics are unique to chordates present at some stage in development.
1. Notochord
2. Pharyngeal slits
3. Tubular nerve cord
4. Post anal tail
Q73. Define notochord. In which animals it is present?
Ans. Notochord is a rod-like semi-rigid body of vacuolated cells (filled with proteinaceous material). Which extends throughout the length of body between gut and dorsal nerve cord during embryonic life. Lower Chordates retain this notochord throughout life e.g. amphioxus. In higher chordates (vertebrates) it is partially or entirely replaced by vertebral column, during developmental stages.
Its primary purpose is to support and to stiffen the body that is to act as skeletal axis.
Q74. What are pharyngeal slits? Write their transformations in animals.
Ans. Pharyngeal slits are series of openings in the lateral walls of pharynx. All chordates develop paired gill. Slits in embryonic stages.
Transformations
• In some chordates (e.g. Amphioxus and fishes these develop into gill).
• In most amphibians these are functional for some period in their life history.
• In reptiles, birds and mammals these are modified for various purposes (e.g. formation of Eustachian tube in mammals).

Q75. Differentiate between Urochordata and Cephalochordata.
Ans.
Urochordata | Cephalochordata
Sub-phylum of chordata which includes invertebrate chordates notochord and nerve cord are present only in their free swimming larvae. e.g. sea squirts, Molgula. | Sub-phylum of chordata which includes invertebrate chordates in which notochord and nerve cord persists throughout the life. e.g., Amphioxus

Q76. Define and classify vertebrates.
Ans. Vertebrates
The animals (chordates) which have vertebral column and cranium, are called vertebrates.
Vertebrates are divided into seven classes which are placed into two groups.
Group Pisces includes 3 classes i.e. Cyclostomata, chondrichothyes and Osteichthyes, (don't have limbs).
Group Tetrapoda have four limbs, include 4 classes i.e. Amphibia, Reptilia, Aves and Mammalia.

--- Page 14 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

Q77. Compare the arrangement of organs of class chondrichthyes with osteichthyes.
Ans.
Class Chondrichthyes
• Cartilagenous skeleton
• Body covered by placoid (tooth like) scales
• Pectoral & pelvic fins are paired. Two dorsal fins.
• Fertilization internal e.g. skate, ray, sharks

Class osteichthyes
• Bony skeleton
• Body covered by dermal bony scales (ctenoid, ganoid, cycloid)
• Possess both median (dorsal, caudal and ventral) and paired (pelvic and pectoral) fins.
• Fertilization external e.g. lung fish, rohu, trout.

Q78. If a frog and a lizard both laid
eggs in the desert. Whose eggs would
have a better chance of survival?
Justify?
Ans. Amniotic Eggs
Lizard eggs will survive because they have
amniotic eggs. Amniotic eggs make
protective extra embryonic membranes i.e.
amninon allantois and chorion. These
membranes protect the embryo from drying
out. Nourish it and enable it to develop on
land.
The amniotic eggs also contain a large
amount of yolk the primary food supply for
the embryo. Such eggs also contain
abundant albumin which provides additional
nutrients and water. The amniotic eggs are
also covered with leathery calcareous shell
which is partly permeable to gases but not to
water.

Q79. Draw the labelled sketch of an
amniotic egg.
Ans.
Yolk sac
Chorion
Allantois
Shell
Amnion
Embryo

Q80. Name the representative
reptiles.
Ans. 1 Turtle
3. Tuatara
2. Cobra
4. Crocodile

Q81. Differentiate between ecothermic (poikilotherms) and endothermic
(homeotherms).
Ans.
Poikilotherms
• The animals which can't regulate their
body temperature and can't maintain it
constant, are called poikilotherms.
• They depend on external source of heat;
so are called ectotherms.
• e.g. fishes, amphibians reptiles.

Homeotherms
• The animals which can maintain their
core temperature are called homeotherms.
• They can obtain heat from cellular
processes to maintain a nearly constant
temperature, so are endotherms.
• e.g. birds and mammals.

REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 15 ---
Q82. Why birds possess crop and
gizzard?
Ans. Crop: In many birds, there is a sac-
like or pouch like structure (diverticulum) of
esophagus which is called crop.
It is a storage structure that allows birds to
quickly ingest large quantities of food.
Gizzard is a region of stomach which has
muscular walls to crush food (as the birds
lack teeth).
Q83. Describe the anatomical
perspective of respiratory system of birds?
Ans. Respiratory System
The birds have external nares, which open in
pharynx through nasal passage ways. The
pharynx leads to trachea and then to bronchi.
The bronchi lead to a complex system of air
sacs which connect to lungs. The lungs are
made of small air tubes called parabronchi at
the lower end of trachea, the organ of voice
called syrinx is situated.
Q84. Why birds have different types
of bills and tongues? Name some
representative birds.
Ans. The bills (beaks) and tongues are of
different shapes and sizes in order to adapt
to specific diets feeding habits and food
sources.
Emu, Kiwi, Pigeon, Sparrow, etc are some
representative birds.
Q85. Differentiate between flying and
running birds also write examples.
Ans. Flying birds are those which can fly
e.g. pigeon, parrot, crow, eagle, robin etc.
but some birds have secondarily lost the
power of flight and are called running birds.
e.g. ostrich, kiwi, rhea, crossway, emu,
penguins etc.
Q86. Why mammals are called so?
Write some distinguishing characteristics
of mammals.
Ans. Characteristics of Mammals
Mammals are called mammals, because their
females possess mammary gland, so they are
nourished by milk from the mammay glands
of mother and have hair on their body.
Skin
Mammals have skin glands developed from
epidermis. Like, sebaceous (oil) glands,
sudoriferous (sweat) glands.
Teeth
Most of them have two sets of teeth during
their lives i.e. milk (deciduous) teeth and
permanent teeth enter presence of external
ear or pinna.
Middle ear bones i.e. malleus, incus and
stapes.
Possess diaphragm that separates coelom
into thoracic and abdominal cavities.
Q87. Make a clear-cut difference
between oviparous viviparous and
ovoviviparous, animals with examples.
Ans. Oviparous are those animals which
lay eggs e.g. fishes, amphibians, reptiles and
birds.
Viviparous are the animals which give birth
to young ones.
Ovoviviparous are some rare animals which
whole development of their embryo
proceeds and are retained in mother's body.
e.g. Duckbill platypus and echidna (spiny
ant-eater).
Q88. Why some animals have pouch
on abdomen?
Ans. Pouch in Mammals
Some mammals have a pouch or marsupium
on the abdomen of their females because
these mammals give birth to immature
young ones which need to complete the
remaining development in mother's pouch
e.g. kangaroo opossum & Tasmanian wolf.
Q89. Placental mammals are most
advanced. Justify?
Ans. Placental mammals are considered
most advanced because, during
developmental stages a structure called
placenta, is formed between mother's uterus
and foetus body. The foetus is nourished and
wastes from foetus are removed through this

--- Page 16 ---
placenta. e.g. dolphin, rat, monkey, bat,
elephant, humans etc.
★Q90. What do you know about
prions and viroids?
Ans. Prions and viroids are also acellular
entities. They are also not considered living
organisms. Prions are composed of protein
only and viroids are composed of circular
RNA only. Both these particles cause
infectious diseases in certain plants.
Examples: Potato Spindle tuber disease,
chrysanthemum stunt disease etc.
Q91. Why viruses are not considered
organisms? Write their composition.
Ans. Viruses are Acellular
Viruses are not considered organisms
because they are acellular i.e. not made of
cells. They lack any of the characteristics of
the three domains of life and are not
classified in any domain and kingdom.
A virus consists of nucleic acid (DNA or
RNA) surrounded by a protein coat. They
cannot run any metabolism and depend upon
the host cell (including plants, animals, and
bacteria) to replicate and synthesize their
proteins.
Q92. On what basis, viruses are
classified? Name the body who's
guidelines are followed while
classifying viruses?
Ans. Classification of Viruses
Viruses are classified based on several
characteristics, including their genetic
material, replication strategy, morphology,
and the hosts they infect. The classification
of viruses follows guidelines established by
the International Committee on Taxonomy
of Viruses (ICTV).
Q93. Classifying viruses on basis of
host range also give examples.
Ans.
1. Animal Viruses: Infect animals,
including humans. Examples: Influenza
virus, Rabies virus.
2. Plant Viruses: Infect plants. Examples:
Tobacco mosaic virus, Potato virus X.
3. Bacteriophages: Infect bacteria.
Examples: T4 phage, Lambda phage.
4. Archaea Viruses: Infect archaea.
Examples: Sulfolobus spindle-shaped virus.
Q94. How the viruses are classified
on basis of morphology? Give
examples.
Ans. 1. Helical Viruses: These have a
capsid with a helical structure surrounding
the nucleic acid.
Examples: Tobacco mosaic virus, Rabies
virus.
2. Icosahedral Viruses: These have a
capsid with a symmetrical icosahedral
shape.
Examples: Adenoviruses, Herpesviruses.
3. Complex Viruses: These have a
complex structure, often with a combination
of icosahedral and helical features, and
sometimes additional structures like tails.
Examples: Bacteriophages (viruses that
infect bacteria).
4. Enveloped Viruses: These have an
outer lipid envelope derived from the host
cell membrane, surrounding their capsid.
Examples: Influenza virus, HIV.
5. Non-enveloped (Naked) Viruses:
These lack an outer lipid envelope and
consist only of a capsid enclosing the
nucleic acid. Examples: Polio virus,
Adenovirus.
Helical Icosahedral Complex Enveloped Non.enveloped
Q95. Classify viruses on the basis of
genetic material. Also write examples
with disease they cause.
Ans. 1. DNA Viruses: Viruses with
DNA as their genetic material. This DNA
can be single-stranded (ssDNA) or double-
stranded (dsDNA). Examples include:
• dsDNA viruses: Adenoviruses (cause
respiratory infections), Herpes viruses
(cause herpes, chickenpox).

--- Page 17 ---
• ssDNA viruses: Parvoviruses (cause
gastroenteritis).
2. RNA Viruses: Viruses with RNA as
their genetic material. This RNA can be
single-stranded (ssRNA) or double-stranded
(dsRNA). Examples include:
• ssRNA viruses: Corona viruses (cause
COVID-19), Influenza viruses (cause flu).
• dsRNA viruses: Rotaviruses (cause
gastroenteritis).
Q96. Classify viruses on the basis of
replication strategy. Write examples.

Ans. 1. Positive-Sense RNA Viruses
The RNA genome is directly translated into
proteins by the host cell's ribosomes.
Examples include Poliovirus, Hepatitis C
virus.
2. Negative-Sense RNA Viruses
The RNA genome is transcribed into mRNA
by a viral RNA polymerase before
translation. Examples include Rabies virus,
Ebola virus.
3. Reverse Transcribing Viruses
These viruses replicate through a DNA
intermediate using the enzyme reverse
transcriptase. They can have RNA or DNA
genomes.
Examples include:
• RNA genome: Retroviruses like HIV
(cause AIDS).
• DNA genome: Hepadnaviruses like
Hepatitis B virus.
Biodiversity
Q97. Differentiate between ecosystem
and niche.
Ans. Ecosystem
An ecosystem is a dynamic and interactive
system composed of living organisms and
their physical environment. It includes all
the biotic factors as well as the abiotic
factors.
Niche
A niche refers to the role or function of an
organism or species within an ecosystem. It
includes its habitat, its interactions with
other organisms (predation, competition, and
symbiosis), and its role in energy flow
within the ecosystem.
Q98. Define biodiversity. List the
levels of its assessment.
Ans. Biodiversity, a term derived from
"biological diversity," refers to the variety of
life forms present in different ecosystems,
encompassing the diversity of species,
genes, and ecosystems.
It represents the richness and variability of
living organisms and their interactions with
each other and their environments it is
assessed at three levels.
1. Species level
2. Genetic level
3. Ecosystem level
Q99. What is the difference between
assessing biodiversity at species level
and genetic level?
Ans. Species Level: At the species level,
biodiversity is assessed by identifying and
counting the different species present within
a given area. Species diversity includes not
only the number of species but also their
relative abundance and distribution.
Genetic Level: At the genetic level,
biodiversity refers to the variety of genetic
information contained within all individual
organisms of a species. This genetic
diversity is crucial for the adaptability and
survival of species, enabling them to cope
with environmental changes and challenges.
Q100. Enlist the reasons for the
cruciality of random sampling in
determining biodiversity.
Ans. Random sampling is a fundamental
technique in ecological studies for assessing
biodiversity within a specific area. This
method is crucial for several reasons.
• It minimizes bias ensuring the equivalent
chance of sampling from every part
• It provides reliable estimates allowing
collection of data for statistical analysis.
• This method facilitates comparisons
between different areas.
• Enhances representativeness by covering
different parts of study area.
• It supports conservation efforts for
monitoring changes in biodiversity over
time.

--- Page 18 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q101. Enlist the methods to assess
distribution of biodiversity.
Ans. Distribution of Biodiversity
The distribution of biodiversity can be
assessed by using the following
methodology.
1. Quadrat sampling
2. Transect sampling
3. Aerial surveys
Q102. Compare the quadrant
sampling & transect sampling
methods, also give the advantages.
Ans.
1. Quadrat Sampling
It involves dividing the study area into a grid
and sampling within randomly selected
squares (quadrats). This method is
particularly useful for studying plant
populations or sessile organisms. For
example, in a forest, a researcher might lay
out quadrats of a fixed size and record the
presence or absence of each plant species
within these quadrats.
2. Transect Sampling
It involves laying out a line or strip (transect)
across the study area and recording species at
regular intervals along this line.
• This method is effective for studying the
distribution of species across
environments. For example, in a coastal
zone, a transect can be laid from the high
tide line to the low tide line, to record the
types and abundance of intertidal
organisms.
Q103. Name the methods to assess
biodiversity by abundance.
Ans.
1. Point counts
2. Mark recapture
3. Quadrat Counts
4. Capture recapture methods
5. Remote sensing

Specie and Speciation
Q104. Define the terms specie and
speciation.
Ans. Species
The term "species" is a fundamental concept
in biology. A species is generally defined as
a group of individuals that can interbreed
and produce fertile offspring under natural
conditions. Members of the same species
share common characteristics and genetic
makeup, which distinguishes them from
individuals of other species.
Speciation
Speciation is the evolutionary process by
which new species arise from a common
ancestor. It involves the accumulation of
genetic changes that lead to reproductive
isolation between populations. There are
several mechanisms of speciation.
Q105. Differentiate between allopatric and Peripatric speciation.
Ans.
| Allopatric speciation | Peripatric speciation |
| :--- | :--- |
| • It occurs when a population is geographically separated into two or more isolated groups. | • It involves a small, isolated population at the edge of a larger population. The small population undergoes rapid evolutionary changes, leading to divergence from the original population. |
| • Over time, the accumulated differences can become significant enough to prevent interbreeding, even if the geographical barrier is removed. | • An example can be seen in island species that evolve from a small founding population. |
| • An example is the speciation observed in Darwin’s finches on the Galápagos Islands, where different populations adapted to diverse environments. | |

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 19 ---
Q106. Compare Parapatric and Sympatric speciation.
Ans.
| Parapatric speciation | Sympatric speciation |
| :--- | :--- |
| • This occurs when populations are adjacent to each other but occupy different environments along a gradient. | • In this form, new species arise within the same geographical area without physical barriers. |
| • Gene flow between the populations is limited, and they evolve adaptations to their specific environments. Over time, this can lead to reproductive isolation. | • Sympatric speciation often occurs through mechanisms such as polyploidy (where an organism has multiple sets of chromosomes) or niche differentiation (where different subpopulations exploit different resources). |
| • An example is the grass species "Anthoxanthum odoratum", which exhibits different adaptations to varying soil conditions across a gradient, leading to reproductive isolation in different soil types. | • For instance, certain plants can undergo polyploidy, leading to immediate reproductive isolation and the formation of new species. |

INQUISITIVE QUESTIONS
Q1. Compare and contrast the domains Archaea and Bacteria and discuss how these differences reflect their evolutionary histories.
Ans. See Q2. and Q3. of theory.
Q2. Explain the concept of a species according to the biological species concept. How does this definition help in understanding species boundaries and the process of speciation? Provide examples to illustrate your points.
Ans. See Q27. of theory.
Q3. Describe the major groups of Kingdom Protista and Kingdom Fungi.
Ans. See Q6. of theory.
Q4. Describe the general characteristics of following animal phyla.
(i) Phylum Cnidaria
(ii) Phylum Platyhelminthes
(iii) Phylum Mollusca
(iv) Phylum Arthropoda
(v) Phylum Echinodermata
Ans. (i) See Q9. of theory.
(ii) See Q10. of theory.
(iii) See Q12. of theory.
(iv) See Q14. of theory.
(v) See Q15. of theory.
Q5. Describe the general characteristics of phylum Chordata.
Ans. See Q16. of theory.
Q6. Write notes on the three groups of mammals.
Ans. See Q21. of theory.
Q7. Discuss the mechanisms of allopatric and sympatric speciation.
Ans. See Q28. of theory.
Q8. Outline the major classification systems for viruses based on their structural features and replication methods. Discuss the significance of these classifications in virology.
Ans. See Q23. of theory.
Q9. Explain the different levels at which biodiversity can be assessed. How do these levels contribute to our understanding of biological diversity and conservation efforts?
Ans. See Q25. of theory.

--- Page 20 ---
Q10. Discuss the importance of random
sampling methods in ecological studies.
Ans. See Q26. of theory.

Q11. Describe the concept of an
ecosystem and niche.
Ans. See Q24. of theory.

INQUISITIVE QUESTIONS
Q1. How are viruses classified based on their nucleic acid content and replication
method?
Ans: Classification on the basis of Genetic Material
1. DNA Viruses: Viruses with DNA as their genetic material. This DNA can be single
stranded (ssDNA) or double-stranded (dsDNA).
Examples:
• dsDNA viruses: Adenoviruses (cause respiratory infections), Herpesviruses (cause
herpes, chickenpox).
• ssDNA viruses: Parvoviruses (cause gastroenteritis).
2. RNA Viruses: Viruses with RNA as their genetic material. This RNA can be single
stranded (ssRNA) or double-stranded (dsRNA).
Examples:
• ssRNA viruses: Coronaviruses (cause COVID-19), Influenza viruses (cause flu).
• dsRNA viruses: Rotaviruses (cause gastroenteritis).
Classification on the basis of Replication Strategy
1. Positive-Sense RNA Viruses: The RNA genome is directly translated into proteins by the
host cell's ribosomes. Examples include Poliovirus, Hepatitis C virus.
2. Negative-Sense RNA Viruses: The RNA genome is transcribed into mRNA by a viral
RNA polymerase before translation. Examples include Rabies virus, Ebola virus.
3. Reverse Transcribing Viruses: These viruses replicate through a DNA intermediate
using the enzyme reverse transcriptase. They can have RNA or DNA genomes.
Examples:
• RNA genome: Retroviruses like HIV (cause AIDS).
• DNA genome: Hepadnaviruses like Hepatitis B virus.
Q2. What may be the drawback in the definition of species according to the
biological species concept?
Ans. According to biological species concept (BSC), a species is a group of naturally
interbreeding population that are reproductively isolated from other such groups in nature.
Drawback
It is not suitable for the organisms reproducing asexually.
Q3. How does biodiversity help maintain balance in an ecosystem?
Ans. Biodiversity is the variety of life forms present in different ecosystems. It is pivotal
to maintain the balance of ecosystem. Organisms reproduce that results in population
increase that is regulated by the predators that prey they organisms.
• Decomposers recycle the nutrients and minerals in soil and make it fertile.
• Pollinators help in the process of pollination, which is source of food for animals.

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch1 Short Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [4/36]: 11th Bio New Ch10 Long Q.txt
==================================================

Unit 10: Human Respiratory System
Long Questions

DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONS

RESPIRATORY SYSTEM OF MAN

Qi. What are main organs of respiratory system of man? Also write
properties of respiratory surface.

Ans. Respiratory system of man consists of organs that carry out external respiration
(uptake of oxygen and disposal of CO2) at body system level. The main organs of this
system are the lungs which provide suitable respiratory surface for gaseous exchange.
Respiratory Surface: Respiratory surface means the area where actual gas exchange occurs
between the environment and the blood. This gaseous exchange occurs through diffusion.
During the oxygen from air diffuses into the blood and (CO> diffuse from blood to air).
Properties of Respiratory Surface: Following are the properties of respiratory surface.

e [tis moist and permeable. So that gas may pass through it.

e It has thin walls. So that gases have to travel minimum distance.

It has a blood supply. So that gases can diffuse in and out of blood.

It has structural support to remain open and does not collapse.

It is located internally to keep surface moist and not lose water to the atmosphere.

Air ventilates over it i.e. moves towards and away from it.

Air reaches to it after passing a branched tubular way, so that air becomes saturated
with water vapour before reaching it.

Q2. Name two major divisions of human respiratory system. Give detail of
upper respiratory tract.

Ans. Respiratory Tract: The respiratory system has a continuous system of passages
called respiratory track, through which air flows into and out of body

Divisions: The respiratory track has two major divisions.

A. Upper respiratory track

B. Lower respiratory track

A. Upper respiratory track: It consists of

(i) Nasal cavity

(ii) Pharynx

(iii) Larynx.

% Note: All questions and paragraphs marked with a star % are explanations of the Box
Information provided in the textbook.
No gases exchange occurs in these organs.

1. Nasal Cavity: The external openings of nose, called nostrils, lead to a nasal cavity. It is a
large, air-filled space behind the nose and partitioned by a nasal septum (a part of the nasal
bone).

Function: As inhaled air flows through the nasal cavity, it is warmed and humidified by
blood vessels present very close to its surface. Hairs in the nose and mucous produced by
mucous membranes trap larger foreign particles in the air before they enter into the
respiratory tract..

The nasal cavity also has chemoreceptors needed for sense of smell, and contribution to the
sense of taste.

2. -Pharynx: It is a tube-like structure that connects the nasal cavity and oral cavity to larynx
and oesophagus. It is part of both the respiratory and digestive systems.

Function

e Air passes from the nasal cavity through the pharynx to larynx (as well as in the opposite direction).

e Food passes from the mouth through the pharynx to the oesophagus.

3. Larynx: Larynx connects the pharynx and trachea. It is composed of muscles and
cartilages. It is also called as voice box, because it contains two bands of smooth muscles
called vocal cords. %
Function: The vocal cords
vibrate when air flows over them
and so produce sound.

Glottis and Epiglottis: Opening
of larynx is called glottis.
Epiglottis is a cartilaginous flap
that extends in front and above |.

the glottis.
Function: When air enters the i —_,
larynx, the epiglottis keeps: - (Wind pipe) =

standing upwards to give way
to air. When we swallow
something, the backward: motion
of the tongue raises the larynx. \__ .
Due to this the epiglottis moves downward, to close the glottis. In this way it prevents
swallowed material from entering the larynx.

Q3. Explain lower respiratory tract of human respiratory system.

Ans. Trachea, air passages and lungs are parts of lower respiratory tract. In lungs the air
passages make a tree like shape, with repeated branching. The length of these air passages
equals to 2,414 Kilometers.

Trachea: Trachea, or windpipé, connects the larynx to the lungs. It is the widest
passageway in the respiratory tract. It is about 1-inch wide and 4 — 6 inches long. Its walls
are made of smooth muscles and C-shaped rings of cartilage. Trachea is lined with mucus

Fig: Larynx and Trachea J

and cilia.
Function: Cilia propel foreign particles trapped /~ 4
in the mucus toward the pharynx. Trachea

The C-shaped cartilage provides strength and ‘

support to the trachea to keep the passage open

and prevents collapse during expiration. Trachea
branches at the bottom to form two bronchi.
2. Bronchi, Bronchioles, and Alveoil: There are
two primary bronchi (singular, bronchus). The
right and left bronchi enter the lungs and branch
into smaller, secondary branch. There are two
secondary bronchi in left lung while three in right
lung. In secondary bronchi, the C- shaped
cartilages are replaced’ with cartilage plates.
Secondary bronchi branch into still smaller
tertiary bronchi, which branch further into very
small bronchioles. The bronchioles do not have
cartilage plates. They divide many times and
make terminal bronchioles end in alveolar
ducts which terminate in clusters of tiny air sacs, ;
called alveoli (singular, alveolus), in the lungs. = \_ Hee nates eet #
Lungs
e The lungs are the largest organs of the respiratory tract
e Outside of each lung is covered by two membranes. First membrane, visceral pleura,
lines the lungs while the second membrane, parietal pleura, lines the inner wall of
thoracic cavity.
e Space between these two membranes, is called pleural cavity. It is filled with fluid. This
allows smooth expansion and contraction of lungs during breathing
e Each lung is divided into lobes. The right lung is larger and contains three lobes. The left
lung is smaller and contains two lobes. The smaller left lung allows space for the heart
present slightly left of the centre of the chest.
=~

a

Right lung Left lung

Fig: Tree like branching of the lower

Trachea

Superior lobe

Primary lobe

Superior lobe
Secondary
bronchus

Tertiary bronchus

Middle lobe Cardiac notch

Inferior lobe Inferior lobe

Right Lung Left Lung

Fig: Right and left lungs

Q4. What are Alveoli? Write their structure and function.
Ans. Alveoli: The terminal bronchi end in alveolar ducts. Each alveolar duct opens in a
cluster of alveoli. These clusters make the bulk a _
of the lung and are surrounded by blood ee ee
capillaries. Each cluster contains 20-30 alveoli. ge ;
Structure of alveolus: An alveolus is made of
moist epithelial tissue (only 0.1 micrometer
thick). They provide the respiratory surface
where gas exchange takes place between air
and blood.
Function of alveolus Alveolar duct
e Alveoli are functional units of lungs where | Mucous gland
gaseous exchange takes place.
e The two lungs may contain approximately:
480 million alveoli (range: 274-790 | Respiratory bronchiole ™"

Pulmonary vein

million) per lung pair in adult human. Pulmonary artery Alveolus
e They provide hu ‘fac fe
a, —E a Fig: Clusters of alveoli wy

e When we breathe in, the alveoli fill with air, causing lungs to expand.

e Oxygen in the air inside the alveoli is absorbed by the blood via diffusion in the
capillaries network that surround them. Blood in these capillaries releases CO2 into the
air inside the capillaries.

e When we breathe out, air leaves the alveoli and rushes into the outside atmosphere,
carrying carbon dioxide with it.

Q5. Explain the mechanism of breathing or ventilation and its control.
Ans. Breathing: The movement of the air in and out of the body is called breathing or
ventilation. Our lungs do not draw in air or push it out. Rather, it is done by creating
negative and positive pressures in the lungs. Two sets of muscles play important role in
breathing i.e. diaphragm (dome- like large skeletal muscle that separates thoracic cavity
and abdomen) and the intercostal muscles (present between each pair of ribs). Breathing
occurs in two steps.

Inspiration

Taking in of air is called inspiration or inhalation.

e Firstly, diaphragm contracts and gets lower and take a more flattened shape.

e At the same time, the intercostal muscles contract. They raise the ribs and expand the rib cage.
This results in increase in the space in the thorax.

e Asaregult, lungs expand because of the adherence of visceral and parietal pleural membranes.

e Expansion of lungs lowers the air pressure inside them, then the atmosphere pressure.

e Air diffuse into the lungs due to pressure gradient.

Expiration

“Moving the air out of lungs is called expiration or exhalation”

e Expansion of the thorax and lungs during inspiration, puts them under elastic tension.
This elastic tension is relieved by the relaxation of the intercostal muscles and
diaphragm.

When diaphragm relaxes, it takes dome-like shape.

Similarly, when intercostal muscles relax, the ribs are lowered and ribcage moves
inward.

These movements decrease the space in thorax and allow the lungs to recoil (shrink).

The pressure inside lungs becomes more than the atmospheric pressure and the air
moves out of the lungs.

7 smeeies i
ase

Lung

Diaphragm

Inspiration (Inhalation) Expiration (Exhalation)
\ Fig: Mechanism of breathing KA

Control of breathing

Each breath is initiated by neurons in a respiratory centre located in the medulla oblongata
i.¢., part of the brain stem. These neurons send impulses to the diaphragm and intercostal
muscles, stimulating them to contract., causing inspiration. When these neurons stop
producing impulses, the diaphragm and intercostal muscles relax and expiration occurs.

Q6. How respiration occurs in birds?

Ans. Respiration in birds

Birds have lungs as well as air sacs in their body.

Air flows in one direction. It flows from outside to posterior air sacs.
For here, the air goes to the lungs, then to
anterior air sacs, and then outside.

The flow of air is in the opposite direction to
the blood flow.

So, gas exchange takes place much more
efficiently. Fig: Respiration in birds

This type of breathing makes birds to obtain the required oxygen even at high altitudes
where oxygen concentration is low.

TRANSPORT OF GASES

Q7. How oxygen is transported in human body?

Ans. Transport of oxygen

e Partial pressure of oxygen in alveoli allows to diffuse through alveoli into pulmonary
capillaries.

e Oxygen can dissolve in blood plasma, but a maximum of 3ml of O2 per litre.

e But whole blood carries almost 200 mL Oz per litre. This is because most of the oxygen
is bound to molecules of haemoglobin inside the RBCs.

e Partial pressure of O2 in alveoli (at sea level) is approximately 105 mm Hg, which is less
than the partial pressure of oxygen in the atmosphere.

e So 97% of the haemoglobin within RBCs combines with Oz and becomes
oxyhaemoglobin which is bright red, tomato juice colour

e As the blood travels through the blood capillaries, some of the oxyhaemoglobin releases
oxygen and become a dark red coloured deoxyhaemoglobin.

e Consequently, when blood leaves the tissue in the veins, it has low partial pressure of
oxygen (40 mm Hg).

e Here, 75% of haemoglobin is saturated in the form of oxyhaemoglobin.

e It means that 22% (97% minus 75%) of the oxyhaemoglobin has released its oxygen to
the tissues, leaving 78% oxyhaemoglobin in the blood as a reserve.

e This large reserve of oxygen is.used by body during.exercise as well as at rest.

Q8. Explain factors affecting oxygen transport.

Ans. 1. Partial pressure of oxygen during exercise: During exercise, the muscles use

more oxygen from the capillary blood: It decreases the venous blood’s partial pressure of

oxygen to 20 mm Hg. So the percent saturation of haemoglobin becomes less from 75% to

35%, The arterial blood still contains 97% oxyhaemoglobin, the amount of oxygen unloaded

is now 62% (97% minus 35%), instead of the 22% at rest.

2. COz concentration and pH: The CO2 produced by tissues lowers the pH of blood. This

lowered pH reduces haemoglobin’s affinity for oxygen and thus causes it to release more

oxygen. Effect of pH on haemoglobin’s affinity for oxygen is known as the Bohr’s effect.

3. Temperature: Increasing temperature during exercise reduces the haemoglobin’s affinity

for oxygen. Skeletal muscles produce more heat, haemoglobin unloads a higher percentage

of oxygen in high temperature.

Q9. Explain transport of Carbon dioxide in man.

Ans. Blood capillaries deliver oxygen to the tissues and remove carbon dioxide from

them. The partial pressure of COz 1s higher in tissues than in blood which results in diffusion

of carbon dioxide into the blood. While the process is reverse in longs where the partial

pressure of CO> is lower in alveoli than in blood.

Blood transport CO? in three ways.

1. As bicarbonate ions: About 72% of carbon dioxide is carried in the blood as bicarbonate

ions. CO2 enters the RBCs and combines with water to form carbonic acid (H2CO3) in the

presence of enzyme carbonic anhydrase. Carbonic acid disassociates to form hydrogen (H"')

and bicarbonate (HCO3°) ions. The hydrogen ion is readily associated to oxyhaemoglobin is

released to the tissue. Whole HCO; moves out of RBCs into plasma. The movement of
bicarbonate (HCO3)) ion is facilitated by a transporter that exchanges one chloride ion (CI’)
for a bicarbonate ion (this is called the “chloride shift” or “Hamburger phenomenon”).

2. As Carboxyhaemoglobin:. About 20% of CO> is carried as carboxyhaemoglobin. When
carbon dioxide diffuses into the blood, its partial pressure raises than the tissues. CO2
combines with the globin chains of haemoglobin and forms carboxyhaemoglobin.

3. As dissolved CO2 in plasma: When CO) enters blood, a little amount dissolves in the
water of blood plasma. About 8% of CO> is carried this way. The blood carries CO2 in these
three forms: to the lungs. The lower PCO: of the air inside the alveoli causes the conversion
of H2CO3 into H20 and CQz.

The CO» diffuses out of blood into the alveoli so that it can leave the body in next
exhalation.

=

Tissue cells. Alveoli

CO,

\ Fig: Transport of carbon dioxide by blood a

SRESPIRATORY PIGMENTS

Q10. What are respiratory pigments? Give their types and role.

Ans. Definition: Respiratory pigments are special proteins in blood or tissues and are

involved in transporting oxygen throughout body. They also do other functions like O2

storage, COz transport, and transport of substances other than respiratory gases.

Types: Respiratory pigments are of two types i.c. haemoglobin and myoglobin.

Haemoglobin

e The protein present in RBCs.

e It is composed of 4 globin (globular) polypeptide chains (two o chains and two B) and
four haem groups.

e There are 141 and 146 amino acids in the o and f chains, respectively

e ach polypeptide chain is folded in such a way that it contains a pocket where heme
group binds.

e So each chain is associated with a haeme group.

e A heam group consist of iron held in porphyrin ring.

e The iron ion is attached with four nitrogen atoms of the polypeptide chain.

e Under higher partial pressure of oxygen, iron ion attaches a molecule of O2. In this way
one haemoglobin molecule can carry up to four O2 molecules.

[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WHhW.FREEILM. COM] WEBSITE: WWW. FREETLM. COM]

Myoglobin

e Myoglobin is the oxygen binding protein in skeletal and cardiac muscle cells of
vertebrates.

e It gives a distinct red or dark gray colour to muscles.

e It is a monomer, composing of a single polynucleotide chain (made of 153 amino acids)
and contains single haem group.

e It is capable of binding with a single O2 molecule.

e The binding affinity of myoglobin is high as compared to that of haemoglobin.
e¢ Myoglobin serves as the oxygen-storing protein in muscles.

e It releases oxygen when the partial pressure of oxygen is below 20 mm Hg.

e So myoglobin provides oxygen to the muscles when they need.

fe CH2

B chains

Polypeptide

OH 0
Haem group
Mycoglobin
Haemoglobin chains
‘. Fig: Structure of haemoglobin and myoglobin ,
Ql1. Give difference between hemoglobin and Myoglobin.
Ans.
Dificrences between Haemoglobin and Myoglobin
Haemeglobin | Myoglobin
e Consists of four polypeptide chains. e Consists of one polypeptide chain.
e Possesses four haem groups. e Possesses one haem group. .
e Found in blood (RBCs). e Found in skeletal and cardiac muscles.
e Can attach four O2 molecules. e Can attach one O2 molecule.
e Transports oxygen. e Stores oxygen.
e Has less affinity with oxygen. e Has more affinity with oxygen.
e Loses oxygen at PO2 60mm Hg. e Loses oxygen at PO2 20mm Hg.

RESPIRATORY DISORDERS

Q12. Write a note on Sinusitis.

Ans. Features

e It is upper respiratory tract disorder.

e [It is the inflammation of the lining of the sinuses (four paired air-filled spaces that
surround the nasal cavity) ie. under the eyes, above the eyes and behind the eyes,
between eyes and nose.

e It may be acute (lasts for 7 to 10-days) or chronic (lasts longer than 12 weeks).

Cause: Most cases of sinusits are due to viral /~

infections, some may be due to bacterial infections

and rare cases due to fungal infections.

Symptoms

e Fever

e Blocked nose

e Pus like nasal discharge

e Loss of sense of smell

e Facial pain
e A feeling that phlegm is falling from the back
of nose into throat Lateral’
* Bieadache w= Fig: Sinuses y
Treatment: As most cases are caused by viruses and resolve without antibiotics. If it is due
to a bacterial infection, antibiotics or sulpha drugs are used. Beside this the nebulization is
prescribed which can reduce inflammation in sinuses and nose. For chronic or recurring
(happen again) sinusitis surgery may be done to remove pathogens and mucous.
Q13. Write a note on Otitis media.
Ans. Features
e Itis the inflammation of the middle ear ‘< Se %. % “
e Otitis may be acute (last for few days) or
chronic (lasts more than six weeks)
Cause: Cause of otitis media accumulation of
fluid in Eustachian tube, which can’t be drained
from the middle ear. So the growth of bacteria and
viruses in the middle ear that leading to the otitis
media.

Qs Inflammation and
a fluid accumulation
in the middle ear

Symptoms
e Severe ear pain in one or both ears.

Eustachian tube
e Fever (narrowed)

e Fluid coming out from ears.
e Loss of balance, and hearing difficulties
Treatment: Include oral and topical directly pain killers and antibiotics (if caused by

bacterial infection).

he Fig: Otitis media

Q14. Write a note Pneumonia.
Ans. Features

Cause: It can be caused primarily by bacteria
(Streptococcus pneumoniae) or viruses (e¢.g.,
human rhinovirus) and less commonly fungi.
Symptoms: Its symptoms include

It is lower respiratory tract infection.
Pneumonia is a form of acute respiratory infection.
It can cause mild to life threatening illness.

In pneumonia, the alveoli of one or both lungs are inflamed and are filled with pus and

fluid.

It makes breathing painful and reduce (—
oxygen intake, .
It is commonly caused by viruses or
bacteria.

It is single largest infection and cause of
death in children worldwide.

Cough with phlegm
Shortness of breath

reat ;

« Ing

Chest pain (Le. Streptococcus pneumonias)

Fever

Blueness of skin Fig: Pneumonia }

Loss of appetite
High heart rate and fatigue

Treatments: Specific antibiotics are used to treat bacterial pneumonia. Analgesics (pain
killer) also used to reduce fever and pain. Vaccination prevents pneumonias both in children
and adults.

Q15. Write a note Pulmonary Tuberculosis.
Ans. Features

Tuberculosis (TB) is a chronic infection.

It can affect many parts of the body but generally affects
the lungs.

The tuberculosis .of lungs is called pulmonary
tuberculosis.

It is highly contagious and spreads through sneezes.

The bacteria enter the lungs, multiply and cause
inflammation and damage to the lung tissue including
the alveoli. The damage to the alveoli can lead to
the formation of small cavities or holes in the lung tissue
which make it difficult for the lungs to function
properly. In advanced stages the alveoli are so damaged
that the lungs may become unable to supply the body

with enough oxygen. This results condition called
respiratory failure which is a medical emergency.

inflamed lining
of bronchiole

\ wig: A lung affected by COPD

Cause: TB is caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Symptoms: Major symptoms of pulmonary tuberculosis are cough-with blood, intermittent

fever usually in the evening, night sweats, weight loss, anorexia, depression, weakness and

dry cough, chest pain due to inflammation of the pleura of the lungs.

Treatment: It includes the use of multiple antibiotics over a long period of time (for 9

months) regularly.

Q16. Write a note on Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Ans. Features: It is an important disorder of the lungs.

Cause

e Common causes of COPD are tobacco smoking, long terms exposure to harmful
pollutants and chemical fumes.

e A small percentage may develop COPD due to génetic disorder i.e protein alpha-1|
antitrypsin deficiency.

Symptoms: The symptoms of COPD include:

e Persistent cough with mucus (sputum)

e Shortness of breath

e Wheezing chest

e Fatigue

e Frequent respiratory tract infection

Treatment:

e COPD is incurable but by its progression (increase) can be slowed down by minimizing
exposure to smoke, pollutants and chemicals.

® Others therapies (treatment) include bronchodilators, inhaled corticosteroids, pulmonary
rehabilitation and oxygen therapy.

e Insome severe cases lung transplantation may be done.

Q17. Write a note on Chronic bronchitis.

Ans. Features

e Itisatype of COPD.

e It involves inflammation and narrowing of
the bronchial tubes in the lungs.

e It leads to increased mucus production
which can further block the airways and
make breathing difficult.

e This disease lasts for 3 months to year
It is caused by long-term exposure to
irritants such as cigarette smoke, air
pollution, or industrial dusts.

Symptoms

Wheezing of chest

e Shortness of breath

e Chest tightness

e Frequent respiratory infections

Fig: Emphysema

Treatment

e It can be managed by quitting smoking

e Bronchiodilators

e Pulmonary rehabilitation

e Oxygen therapy.

Q18. Write a note on Emphysema.

Ans. Features

e Itisatype of COPD.

* In emphysema, the inner walls of alveoli are ruptured.

e This creates one large air space instead of many small ones.

e This reduces the surface area for gas exchange.

Cause

e The primary cause of emphysema is smoking.

e It-can also be caused by long-term exposure to air pollution, dust or chemical fumes.
¢ Genetic deficiency of protein called alpha-1 antitrypsin may be cause emphysema.

Symptoms
e Shortness of breath
e Coughing
« Wheezing
’ Fatigue
© Chest tightness
Treatment
e Quitting Smoking
e =Bronchodilators
e Inhaled steroids
e Oxygen therapy
e Pulmonary rehabilitation


--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch10 Long Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [5/36]: 11th Bio New Ch10 MCQ's.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 10: Human Respiratory System

Multiple Choice Questions

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)

1. During inhalation, diaphragm;
(a) Contracts and moves upward
(b) Contracts and moves downward
(c) Relaxes and moves upward
(d) Relaxes and moves downward

2. Which part of the respiratory system
acts as the respiratory surface?
(a) Larynx (b) Trachea
(c) Bronchi (d) Alveoli

3. How many oxygen molecules can
attach with a haemoglobin molecule?
(a) 1 (b) 2
(c) 3 (d) 4

4. What is TRUE about respiratory
pigments?
(a) Transport oxygen from lungs to tissues
(b) Transport oxygen and carbon dioxide
in equal amounts
(c) Transport less oxygen and more carbon
dioxide
(d) Regulate the pH of blood

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
5. Which respiratory pigment is found in
muscle tissue?
(a) Haemoglobin (b) Melanin
(c) Myoglobin (d) Chlorophyll
6. What is the maximum amount of air
that can be inhaled or exhaled during
a respiratory cycle?
(a) Tidal volume
(b) Vital capacity
(c) Inspiratory reserve volume
(d) Expiratory reserve volume
7. In what form is carbon dioxide
primarily transported in the
bloodstream?
(a) Dissolved in plasma
(b) Bound to haemoglobin
(c) Converted to bicarbonate ions
(d) None of the above
8. Which of the following treatments is
commonly used to manage pulmonary
TB?
(a) Antibiotics (b) Cough syrup
(c) Surgery (d) Chemotherapy
9. Which of the following is a common
cause of pneumonia?
(a) Bacterial infection
(b) Viral infection
(c) Fungal infection
(d) All of these
10. Emphysema is characterized by:
(a) Inflammation of airways
(b) Narrowing of airways
(c) Destruction of the alveoli in lungs
(d) Fluid build-up in lungs

SLO BASED MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
Respiratory System of Man
11. Which is included in cellular
respiration?
(a) Glycolysis
(b) Krebs Cycle
(c) Electron Transport chain
(d) All of these
12. It is part of upper respiratory tract:
(a) Nasal cavity (b) Trachea
(c) Bronchi (d) Bronchioles
13. Nasal cavity contains chemoreceptors
needed for:
(a) Sense of taste (b) Sense of touch
(c) Sense of smell (d) Sense of hearing
14. Pharynx is part of both respiratory
system and:
(a) Digestive system
(b) Neuron System
(c) Excretory system
(d) Reproductive system
15. Voice box in humans is infact:
(a) Pharynx (b) Larynx
(c) Syrinx (d) Glottis
16. During swallowing epiglottis closes:
(a) Pharynx (b) Glottis
(c) Nasal cavity (d) Esophagus
17. Wall of trachea has which type of
rings of cartilage:
(a) A shaped (b) B-shaped
(c) C-shaped (d) D-shaped
18. Cartilage plates are not present in:
(a) Trachea (b) Bronchi
(c) Bronchioles (d) Epiglottis
19. Pleura cavity of lungs is filled with:
(a) Air (b) Blood
(c) Fluid (d) Mucus
20. The right lung is large and contains
how many lobes:
(a) Five (b) Two
(c) Three (d) Four

--- Page 3 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

21. Which provide the respiratory surface
    where gas exchange takes place?
    (a) Diaphragm          (b) Pleura
    (c) Alveolus           (d) Nasal cavity
22. Cluster of alveoli contains alveoli:
    (a) 2 to 2             (b) 20 to 30
    (c) 200 to 300         (d) 2000 to 3000
23. Oxygen inside alveoli is absorbed by
    blood via:
    (a) Active transport
    (b) Facilitated transport
    (c) Diffusion
    (d) Phagocytosis
24. In breathing role is played by:
    (a) Diaphragm and intercostal muscles
    (b) Diaphragm and lung muscles
    (c) Trachea and Bronchi
    (d) Bronchioles and alveoli
25. Which is not true for inspiration?
    (a) Diaphragm relaxes
    (b) Intercostal muscles contract
    (c) Diaphragm contracts
    (d) Pressure in lungs decreased
26. Intercostal muscles are related to:
    (a) Lungs              (b) diaphragm
    (c) Ribs               (d) Trachea
27. Control of breathing is located in:
    (a) Medulla oblongata (b) Cerebrum
    (c) Cerebellum         (d) diaphragm
           Transport of Gases
28. Whole blood carries oxygen almost:
    (a) 2 ml per liter
    (b) 20 ml per liter
    (c) 200 ml per liter
    (d) 2000 ml per liter
29. Oxygen is bound to haemoglobin in:
    (a) Plasma             (b) RBC
    (c) WBC                (d) Platelets

30. Partial pressure of oxygen in vein is:
    (a) 20 mm Hg           (b) 200 mm Hg
    (c) 40 mm Hg           (d) 400 mm Hg
31. Partial pressure of oxygen in alveoli at
    sea level is:
    (a) 104 mm Hg          (b) 105 mm Hg
    (c) 106 mm Hg          (d) 107 mm Hg
32. At 105 mm Hg of partial pressure of
    oxygen how much haemoglobin
    combines with oxygen.
    (a) 67%                (b) 77%
    (c) 87%                (d) 97%
33. pH of blood is lowered by which gas
    produced by tissue:
    (a) Oxygen             (b) CO2
    (c) Xl2                (d) water vapours
34. Bohr effect shows effect of which
    factor on haemoglobins affinity for
    oxygen:
    (a) O2                 (b) N2
    (c) Temperature        (d) pH
35. Approximately 72% of CO2 is carried
    in blood as:
    (a) Carbonate ions
    (b) Bicarbonate ions
    (c) Acetate ions
    (d) Carbonic acid ions
36. In Hamburger phenomenon which ion
    is involved:
    (a) Na+ ion            (b) Cl- ion
    (c) K+ ion             (d) Ca++ ion
37. Chloride shift is related to transport
    of:
    (a) NaCl               (b) CO2
    (c) O2                 (d) N2
38. Myoglobin provide oxygen to:
    (a) Muscles            (b) Blood
    (c) Lymph              (d) Water
39. Haemoglobin is composed of how
    many globin polypeptide chain/s:
    (a) One                (b) Two
    (c) Three              (d) Four

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 4 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Respiratory Pigments
40. Which of following are respiratory
pigments?
(a) Albumin & Globulin
(b) Haemoglobin
(c) Myoglobin
(d) Both (b) & (c)
41. Number of oxygen (O2) molecules, one
haemoglobin can carry:
(a) 1                                     (b) 2
(c) 3                                     (d) 4
42. The polypeptide chain of haemoglobin
are held together by:
(a) Peptide bonds
(b) Phosphodiester bonds
(c) Salt bridges, hydrogen bonds and
hydrophobic effects
(d) Disulfide bridge
43. Which statement is correct about
myoglobin?
(a) It contains four peptide chains
(b) It is found in RBCs
(c) It is a monomer with single haem
group.
(d) It transports four O2 molecules.
44. When does oxyhaemoglobin release
oxygen?
(a) When body temperature decreases
(b) When partial pressure of oxygen is
above 100mmHg
(c) When partial pressure of oxygen is
below 20mmHg.
(d) When partial pressure of oxygen is
equal to 20mmHg.
45. The number of amino acids in α-chain
of Haemoglobin:
(a) 140                                 (b) 146
(c) 141                                 (d) 142
46. The number of amino acids in β-chain
of Haemoglobin:
(a) 148                                 (b) 146
(c) 149                                 (d) 145

47. Single polynucleotide chain of
myoglobin has___ amino acids.
(a) 152                                 (b) 153
(c) 141                                 (d) 146
Respiratory Disorders
48. Which disease affects ear:
(a) Sinusitis
(b) Pneumonia
(c) Pulmonary tuberculosis
(d) Otitis media
49. Plugged nose, pus like nasal discharge,
loss sense of smells are symptoms of:
(a) Sinusitis                         (b) Pneumonia
(c) Otitis media                   (d) Tuberculosis
50. Accumulation of fluid in Eustachian
tube causes which diseases:
(a) Sinusitis                         (b) Pneumonia
(c) Otitis media                   (d) Tuberculosis
51. Pneumonia is a form of acute
respiratory infection affects:
(a) Alveoli                           (b) Trachea
(c) Bronchi                          (d) Bronchioles
52. Cause of tuberculosis is:
(a) Malnutrition
(b) Unhygienic environment
(c) Mycobacterium
(d) Streptococcus
53. Which part of the body is affected in
pulmonary tuberculosis:
(a) Lungs                             (b) Kidney
(c) Heart                             (d) Eyes
54. Emphysema is breakdown of:
(a) Trachea                         (b) Bronchi
(c) Bronchioles                   (d) Alveoli
55. Inflammation of lining that surround
nasal cavity is known as:
(a) Pneumonia                     (b) Bronchitis
(c) Otitis media                   (d) Sinusitis

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 5 ---
56. Nebulization can be useful in reducing
inflammation of nose to treat which
disorder?
(a) Emphysema
(b) Sinusitis
(c) Otitis media
(d) Chronic Bronchitis
57. Growth of bacteria and viruses in the
middle ear leads to which disorder?
(a) Pulmonary tuberculosis
(b) Otitis media
(c) Pneumonia
(d) Sinusitis
58. Which one is single largest infectious
disease and cause of death in children
worldwide?
(a) Pneumonia (b) Sinusitis
(c) Emphysema (d) Tuberculosis

59. Which infectious entities cause
pneumonia?
(a) Rhinovirus
(b) Streptococcus pneumonia
(c) Fungi
(d) All
60. Small cavities and holes formation in
lung tissues are due to?
(a) Emphysema
(b) Bronchitis
(c) Pulmonary tuberculosis
(d) Pneumonia
61. Emphysema can also be caused by
deficiency of which protein?
(a) alpha – 1 antitrypsin
(b) alpha 2 antitrypsin
(c) beta – 1 antitrypsin
(d) beta – 2 antitrypsin

ANSWER KEY
1. b 2. d 3. d 4. a 5. c 6. b 7. c 8. a
9. d 10. c 11. d 12. a 13. c 14. a 15. b 16. b
17. c 18. c 19. c 20. c 21. c 22. b 23. c 24. a
25. a 26. c 27. a 28. c 29. b 30. c 31. b 32. d
33. b 34. d 35. b 36. b 37. b 38. a 39. d 40. d
41. d 42. c 43. c 44. c 45. c 46. b 47. b 48. d
49. a 50. c 51. a 52. c 53. a 54. d 55. d 56. b
57. b 58. a 59. d 60. c 61. a

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch10 MCQ's.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [6/36]: 11th Bio New Ch10 Short Q.txt
==================================================

Unit 10: Human Respiratory System

Short Questions

SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS EXERCISE

Respiratory System of Man

Q1. Define respiratory surface and list
its properties.

Ans. Respiratory surface is the area where
actual gas exchange between environment
and the blood takes place. Following are its
properties.

(i) Moist thin and permeable epithelium
(ii) Located internally

(iii) Has blood supply

(iv) Well ventilated

Q2. How nasal cavity perform its
functions?

Ans. Function of Nasal Cavity

1.As inhaled air flows through the nasal
cavity it is warmed and humified by blood
vessels present very, close to its surface.

2. Hairs in the nose and mucous produced by
mucous membranes trap larger foreign
particles in air before they go deeper into
respiratory tract.
Q3. Trace the path of air through
different parts of the respiratory system.

Ans. Air — nostrils — nasal cavity >
pharynx — larynx — trachea > bronchi
bronchioles — alveolar duct — Alveoli.
Q4. Describe the _ structure
function of alveoli.

Ans. Alveoli are made of moist epithelial
tissues only 0.1 micro meter thick. A
network of tiny blood capillaries surround
the alveolus. Oxygen in the air inside the
alveoli is absorbed by the blood via
diffusion.

QS. What is the role of diaphragm
during inhalation and exhalation?

Ans. During inhalation the diaphragm
contracts and take a more flattened shape.
This causes expansion of lungs, lowering air
pressure in lungs and the air moves in.
During exhalation diaphragm relaxes it takes
dome like shape. This causes contraction of
lungs, increasing air pressure in lungs and
the air moves out.

Q6. What are the three ways of the
transport of carbon dioxide in blood?

and

Ans,
1.72% of CQ is transported in blood as
bicarbonate.

2.20% of COr is
Carboxyhaemoglobin.
3.8% of CQO is carried dissolved in water of

blood plasma.

carried as

Q7. What are the advantages of having
millions of alveoli rather than a pair of
simple balloon-like lungs?

Ans. Millions of alveoli provide a large
total surface area for gas exchange. They are
also located internally and does not lose
water to the atmosphere.

Q8. Differentiate between:

(a) Internal and external respiration

(b) Upper and lower respiratory tract

- (c) Bronchi and bronchioles

(d) Haemoglobin and myoglobin

Ans.

(a) Internal and external respiration

Inter respiration (also called as cellular
respiration) is metabolism of glucose in the
cell to got energy

External respiration involves breathing and
exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide in
capillaries

(b) Upper and lower respiratory tract
Upper respiratory tract includes nasal cavity,
pharynx and larynx while lower respiratory
tract includes trachea, bronchi, bronchioles
and alveoli.

(c) Bronchi and bronchioles

Trachea branches at the bottom into two:
branches and called bronchi. These bronchi
enter the lung and form secondary bronchi
which divides into tertiary bronchi which
branch further to form small bronchioles.

(d) Haemoglobin and myoglobin
Haemoglobin is oxygen carrying protein
found in RBCs in blood. Myoglobin is
oxygen storing protein found in the muscles.

SLO BASED SHORT QUESTION ANSWERS

Respiratory System of Man
Q9. What are the largest organs of
respiratory tract?
Ans. Lungs are the largest organs of
respiratory system which are covered by two

membranes. Each lung is divided into lobes.
Right lung is larger having three lobes. The
left lung is smaller and contains two lobes.

Q10. What properties enable
respiratory surfaces for effective diffusion
of gases?

Ans. The following properties enable

respiratory surfaces for effective diffusion of

gases across them.

e It is moist and permeable, so that gases
may pass through it.

e It has thin walls, so that gases have to
travel minimum distance.

e It has blood supply, so that gases can
diffuse in and out of blood.

e It has structural support,. to remain open
and does not collapse.

e It is located internally, that is why it has
moist surface which does not lose water to
the atmosphere.

e Air ventilates over it 1.e., moves towards
and away from it.

e Air reaches to it after passing a branched
tubular way, so that air becomes saturated
with water vapour before reaching it.

Q11. What do you mean by respiratory
tract? Give its division.
Ans. The organs of the respiratory system
form a continuous system of passages,
called the respiratory tract, through which
air flows into and out of the body. The
respiratory tract has two major divisions: the
upper respiratory tract and the lower
respiratory tract.

Upper Respiratory Track: It consists of

nasal cavity, pharynx and larynx.

Lower Respiratory Track: The lower

respiratory tract includes trachea, bronchi,

bronchioles and lungs.

Q12. What are vocal cords. How they

produce sound.

Ans. Vocal cards are two bands of smooth

muscles. The vocal cords vibrate when air

flows over them to produce sound.

" cords

Q13. Why is larynx called voice box?

Ans. Larynx is called voice box it contains
two bands of smooth muscles called vocal
cords. These vocal cords vibrate when air
flows over them and produce sound.

*Q14.What happen’ if swallowed
material] enters the larynx?
Ans. If swallowed material enter the

larynx it irritates the larynx and stimulates a
strong cough reflex. This helps to expel the
material out of the Larynx and into the
throat.

* Q15.How sound produced in larynx?

Ans. Muscles in the larynx move the vocal
apart to allow breathing. Other
muscles in the larynx move the vocal cords
together to allow the production of vocal
sounds. The latter muscles also control the
pitch of sounds and help control their
volume.

Q16. Write a note on layers of lungs.

Ans. The lungs are the largest organs of
the respiratory tract. The outside of each
lung is covered by two membranes. First
membrane, visceral pleura, lines the lungs
while the second membrane, parietal pleura,
lines the inner wall of thoracic cavity.

Q17. What is pleural cavity? Give its
function?
Ans. The small space between visceral

and parietal pleural membranes, called
pleural cavity is filled with fluid. This fluid
allows the lungs to expand and contract
freely during breathing.

Q18. What do you know about lobes of
lungs?

Ans. The right lung is larger and contains
three lobes. The left lung is smaller and
contains two lobes. The smaller left-lung
allows space for the heart.
* Q19.What is surfactant in alveoli? Give
its function.

Ans. Some epithelial cells of alveoli
secrete a liquid called surfactant, which lines
the inside of alveoli. It prevents the alveoli
from collapsing and sticking together when
air moves out of them. In healthy lungs,
Surfactant is constantly secreted and
reabsorbed.

*Q20.Write functions of pulmonary
arteries and pulmonary veins.

Ans. Pulmonary arteries carry
deoxygenated blood to the lungs and
pulmonary veins carry oxygenated blood
back to the heart.

Q21. Define breathing. Name
muscles involving in this process.
Ans. The movement of the air in and out
of the body is called breathing or ventilation.
It is done by creating negative and positive
pressures in the lungs. This role is played by
two sets of muscles ie., (i) diaphragm
(dome like large skeletal muscle that
separates thoracic cavity and abdomen) and
(11) the intercostal muscles.

*Q22.What is effect of atmospheric
pressure at high altitudes?

Ans. Atmospheric pressure is lower at
high altitude. It requires greater increase in
the space of thorax for inspiration. That is
why it is difficult to breathe at high
altitudes. Due to this reason athlete often
undertake -high altitude training before
competitions

Q23. What are intercoastal muscles.
Give their role during breathing

Ans. Intercoastal muscles are present
between each pair of ribs. During inspiration
the intercoastal muscles contract and raise
the ribs to expand rib cage while during
expiration the intercoastal muscles relax.
Ribs are lowered and ribcage moves inward.

the

Q24. Differentiate between inspiration
and expiration.
Ans,

Inspiration Expiration

e Taking in air into | e Moving the air out
the lungs is called | of lungs is called
inspiration or| expiration or
inhalation. exhalation.

e Diaphragm e Diaphragm relaxes
contracts and take and becomes
more flattened dome-shaped.
shape. e Intercostal

e Intercostal muscle muscles relax.
contract. e Ribs moves

e Ribs moves downwards and
upwards and inwards, reducing
outwards, rib cage volume.
expanding the ribs. | e Thoracic cavity

e Thoracic cavity | volume decreases.
volume increases. |e Lungs recoil due

e Lungs expand due | to elastic tension.
to pleural
membrane
adherence.

Q25. How breathing is controlled?

Ans. The process of breathing is
controlled by respiratory center located in
the medulla oblongata i.e. part of brain stem.
Neuron from this center send impulse to
diaphragm and_ intercoastal muscles,
stimulating them to contract causing
inspiration and vice versa.

Q26. Why blood plasma has less oxygen
dissolved into it.

Ans. Blood plasma can _ dissolve a
maximum of only about 3ml O2 per litre.
Yet whole blood carries almost 200ml O2
per litre! The reason is that most of the
oxygen is not dissolved in blood plasms but
is bound to molecules of haemoglobin inside
the RBCs.
Q27. Differentiate between oxyhaemoglobin
and deoxyhaemoglobin.

Ans. Oxyhaemoglobin is bright red while
deoxyhaemoglobin is dark red, this imparts
bluish tinge to tissues. Due to these color
changes, arteries carrying oxygenated blood
are indicated with red color while veins
carrying deoxygenated blood with blue
color

*Q28.What is significance of oxygen
reserve in blood?

Ans. The oxygen reserve ensures that the
blood contains enough oxygen to maintain
lite for four to five minutes if breathing is
interrupted or if heart stops pumping.

Q29. Define Bohr effect.

Ans. The CQ: produced by tissues lowers
the pH of blood. This lowered pH reduces
haemoglobin’s affinity for oxygen and thus
causes it to release oxygen more readily.

The effect of pH on haemoglobin’s affinity |

for oxygen is known as the Bohr effect.

Q30. How does carbonic acid is
produced in RBCs?

Ans. Approximately 72% of carbon
dioxide is carried in the blood as bicarbonate

tons. CO enters the RBCs and combines.

with water to form carbonic acid (H2COs3) in
the presence of enzyme carbonic anhydrase.

CO, + H, O Carbonic anhydrase By H, Co,
* Q31.Give importance of carbonic acid.

Ans. Formation of carbonic acid is
important in maintaining the acid base
balance of the blood because bicarbonate
serves as the major buffer of the blood
plasma.

Q32. Define Hamburger phenomenon.

Ans. Carbonic acid (H2CO3) disassociates
to form hydrogen ions (H*) and bicarbonate
ions (HCO3). The hydrogen ion readily
associates with oxyhaemoglobin and oxygen

of oxyhaemoglobin is released to the tissue.

While the bicarbonate ions (HCO3;) is

facilitated by a transporter that exchanges

one chloride ion (CI) for a bicarbonate ion

(this is called the “chloride shift” or

“Hamburger phenomenon”)

Q33. Do COz and O2 compete to bind

with haemoglobin?

Ans. COp binds to the protein portion of

haemoglobin while O2 binds to the haem

irons. So, both do not compete for
attachment to haemoglobin.

*Q34.What is meant by

monoxide poisoning?

Ans.

e¢ Incomplete combustion of fuels like
wood, gasoline, propane or natural gas
produce, CO (carbon monoxide) gas.

e If gas heaters are left burning overnight
in closed rooms, CO accumulate in
them.

e Carbon monoxide enters the body
through inhalation and binds to
haemoglobin with much higher affinity
than oxygen.

e This binding reduces the amount of
hemoglobin to transport oxygen to the
body tissues, leading to tissue oxygen
efficiency hypoxia.

carbon

e This leads to condition called CO
poisoning.
e Its symptoms include headache,

dizziness, weakness, nausea, confusion
shortness of breath, chest pain and loss
of consciousness.
e In severe cases it can cause permanent
brain damage, and even death.
Respiratory Pigments
Q35. What are respiratory pigments?
Give their functions. Also write their
names.
Ans. Respiratory pigments are special
proteins in blood or tissues and are involved

in transporting oxygen throughout body.
They also serve for other purposes e.g., O2
storage, CO2 transport, and transport of.
substances other than respiratory gases. The
two well-known respiratory pigments are
haemoglobin and myoglobin,

Q36. Describe the structure of
haemoglobin?

Ans. Haemoglobin is a protein present in
RBCs. A _ haemoglobin molecule is
composed of four globin (globular)
polypeptide chains (two a chains and two B)
and four haem groups. There are 141 and
146 amino acids in the a and B chains,
respectively. Each polypeptide chain is
folded in such a way that it contains a
pocket where the haem group binds. So,
each chain is associated with a haem group.
A haem group consists of an iron held in a
porphyrin ring. The iron ion is attached with
four nitrogen atoms of the polypeptide
chain. Under higher partial pressure of
oxygen, iron ion attaches a molecule of Oo.

In this way, one haemoglobin molecule can ,

carry up to four Oz molecules.

*Q37.What are bonds in polypeptide
chains of haemoglobin?

Ans. The four polypeptide chains of
haemoglobin are bound to each other by salt
bridges, hydrogen bonds, and hydrophobic
effect.

Q38. What is myoglobin? Give its
function.
Ans. Myoglobin is the oxygen-binding

protein in skeletal and cardiac muscle cells
of vertebrates. It gives a distinct red or dark
gray colour to muscles.

Q39. How the structure of myoglobin
makes it more oxygen binding protein?

Ans. It is a monomer composing of a
singly polynucleotide chain. (made of 153
amino acids) and contains a single haem
group. Therefore, it is capable of binding

with a single O2 molecule. The binding
affinity of myoglobin is high as compared to
that of haemoglobin. As a result, myoglobin
serves as the oxygen-strong protein in
muscles. It releases oxygen when the partial
pressure of oxygen is below 20mm Hg. In
this way, myoglobin provides oxygen to the

muscles when they need.
Respiratory Disorders

Q40. Enlist respiratory tract disorders.

Ans. Respiratory disorders can range from
common cold to more severe diseases.
Upper respiratory tract infections

e Sinusitis

e Otitis media

Lower respiratory tract infections

e Pneumonia

e Pulmonary tuberculosis

Disorders of lungs

e COPD

e Emphysema

Q41.. What is sinusitis? Give _ its
symptoms.

Ans. It is the inflammation of the lining

off the sinuses (four paired air-filled spaces
that surround the nasal cavity 1.e., under the
eyes; above the eyes; between the eyes and
behind the eyes). It may be acute (lasts for 7
to 10 days) or chronic (lasts longer than 12
week).

Symptoms of sinusitis include fever,
plugged nose, pus-like nasal discharge, loss
of sense of smell, facial pain, a feeling that
phlegm is falling from the back of nose into
throat, and headache that is sometimes
aggravated by bending over

Q42. What do you know about Otitis
media? Also write its symptoms and
treatment.

Ans. It is the inflammation of the middle
ear. Otitis may be acute (rapid onset) or
chronic (lasts more than six weeks).
Cause: The common cause of otitis media
accumulation of fluid in Eustachian tube,
which cannot be drained from the middle
ear. When this fluid is not drained, it allows
the growth of bacteria and viruses in the
middle ear that lead to otitis media.
Symptoms of otitis media include severe ear
pain, pulling at one or both ear, fever
draining from ear(s), loss of balance, and
hearing difficulties.

Treatment include oral and topical pain
killers and antibiotics (if caused by bacterial
infection).

Q43. How pneumonia affects
Give the main cause of this disease.

lungs?

Ans. Pneumonia is a form of acute
respiratory infection.

Cause: It can lead to life-threating illness. In
pneumonia, the alveoli of one or both lungs
are inflamed and are filled with pus and
fluid. It makes breathing painful and limits
oxygen intake.

Pneumonia is most commonly caused by
viruses or bacteria. It is the single largest
infectious cause of death in children
worldwide.

A variety of organisms, primarily bacteria
(particularly Streptococcus pneumonia or
viruses (e.g., human rhinovirus) and less
commonly fungi, can cause pneumonia.

* Q44. What was the death rate of children
in 2017 due to pneumonia?

Ans. Pneumonia killed more than 808000
children under the age of 5 in 2017,
according for 15% of all deaths of children
under 5 years.

Q45. What is pulmonary tuberculosis?
Give its treatment.

Ans. Tuberculosis (TB) is a_ chronic
infection caused by bacteria Mycobacterium
tuberculosis. The tuberculosis of the lungs is
called pulmonary tuberculosis. It is highly

contagious and spreads through cough or
sneezes. The bacteria enter the lungs,
multiply and cause inflammation and
damage to the lung tissue, including the
alveoli. The damage to the alveoli can lead
to the formation of small cavities or holes in
the lung tissue, which can make it difficult
for the lungs to function properly.
Treatment includes the use of multiple
antibiotics over a long period of time (for 9
months) regularly.

Q46. What is COPD? Give its symptoms
and treatment.

Ans. Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) is a chronic inflammatory
disease of lungs.

Causes: The common causes of COPD are
tobacco smoking, long terms exposure to
harmful pollutants and chemical fumes etc.
A small percentage of genetic predisposition
(protein alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency) can
also develop COPD, even without smoking
or significant exposure to pollutants.
Symptoms: The symptoms of COPD are
persistent cough with mucus (sputum),
shortness of breath wheezing chest,
fatigue and frequent respiratory tract
infections.

Treatment: COPD is incurable but by
minimizing exposure to smoke pollutants,
and chemicals this disease can slow its

progression. Other therapies include
bronchiodilators, inhaled corticosteroids,
pulmonary rehabilitation and oxygen

therapy. In some severe cases, surgery such
as lung transplantation may be considered.
* Q47. Write a note on chronic bronchitis.

Ans. Chronic bronchitis: Chronic
bronchitis is a type of COPD. It involves
inflammation and narrowing of the
bronchial tubes in the lungs. It leads to
increased mucus production, which can
further block the airways and make
breathing difficult. This disease lasts for
three months to two years. It is caused by
long-term exposure to irritants such as
cigarette smoke, air pollution or industrial
dusts.

Symptoms of chronic bronchitis are almost
same as of COPD such as wheezing,
shortness of breath, chest tightness and
frequent respiratory infections.

Chronic bronchitis can be managed by
quitting smoking. Other treatments are
bronchodilators, pulmonary rehabilitation,
and in some cases oxygen therapy.

_ LONG QUESTIO
Ql. Describe the mechanism of
inhalation and exhalation.

Ans. See Q5. of theory

Q2. Describe the transport of oxygen
through blood.

Ans. See Q7. of theory.

Q3. Describe the transport of carbon
dioxide through blood.

Ans. See Q9. of theory.

Q4. Describe the structure and

function of haemoglobin.
Ans. See Q10. of theo

INQUISITIVE
Q1.
and CQ:?
Ans.
the gaseous exchange is optimized.
Q2.
exchange?

Ans.
of bronchial tubes in the lungs. It leads to

Q48. What is emphysema? How it is
caused?

Ans. Emphysema is a type of COPD. In
emphysema, the inner walls of alveoli are
damaged, causing them to eventually
rupture. This creates one larger air space
instead of many small ones and reduces the
surface area available for gas exchange.
Cause: The primary cause of emphysema is
smoking. It can also be caused by long-term
exposure to air pollution, dust, or chemical
fumes. Emphysema disease can also be
caused by a genetic deficiency of a protein
called alpha-1 antitrypsin.

NS (EXERCISE)

Q5. Describe the causes, symptoms and
treatment of sinusitis.

Ans. See Q12. of theory.

Q6. Describe the causes, symptoms and
treatment of pneumonia and pulmonary
tuberculosis.

Ans. See Q14. and Q15. of theory

Q7. Describe causes, symptoms and
treatment of emphysema.

Ans. See Q18. of theory.

QUESTIONS

How does the structure of the alveoli optimize the exchange of gases like O
Alveoli wall is only 0.1 micrometre thick and also moist. Due to these two factors
How do disease like Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease effect gaseous

In Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease cause inflammation resulting in narrowing

increase mucus production which block the

airways. This ultimately affects the gaseous exchange efficiency.
Q3. Can you explain the process of external respiration and internal
respiration in context of gaseous exchange respiration?

Ans. During external gaseous exchange i.e. intake of O2 and out take of CO: takes place at
the alveoli level. While during internal respiration the oxygen is taken in and CO> is given
out at cellular level during cellular respiration.

Q4. How does the transport of oxygen in blood stream affects cellular
respiration?

Ans. About 97% of the haemoglobin within RBCs combines. with oxygen and becomes
oxyhaemoglobin. As the blood travels through the blood capillaries oxyhaemoglobin
releases oxygen. Here 75% of haemoglobin is lefi saturated It means that 22% of the
oxyhaemoglobin has released its oxygen to the tissues for use in cellular respiration.

Q5. What are environmental factors that can influence gaseous exchange in
human?

Ans. Gaseous exchange can be influenced by environmental factors like temperature,
humidity, altitude, and air pollution.


--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch10 Short Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [7/36]: 11th Bio New Ch11 Long Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

                               Unit 11: Human Circulatory System

                                       Long Questions

                                   DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONS

                           STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONING OF HEART

Q1. Describe the structure of walls of heart and rationalize the thickness of the
walls of each chamber.
Ans. Location: It is situated in the middle of chest cavity (between the lungs). Its back
surface is near vertebral column while its front surface is behind sternum and rib cartilages.
Human heart is a hard-working pump that moves blood through body.
Pericardium
Heart is enclosed in a sac called pericardium. Pericardium separates heart from surrounding
organs. It is composed of the following two layers;
1. Fibrous pericardium: Outer layer of pericardium is called fibrous pericardium. It is made
   of strong connective tissue. It protects heart against external pressure and shocks. It
   also prevents excessive dilation of heart.
2. Serous pericardium: Inner layer of pericardium is called serous pericardium. It is a sac,
   made of two layer i.e.,
   a) Parietal pericardium: Outer parietal pericardium – present beneath fibrous
      pericardium.
   b) Visceral pericardium: Inner visceral pericardium (also called epicardium) – closely
      attached to the underlying heart.
Pericardial cavity: The space between parietal and visceral pericardium is called pericardial
cavity. It contains up to 50 ml pericardial fluid. It lubricates heart and protects it from
infections.
Wall of the Heart
The wall of heart is composed of three layers.
• Epicardium: The inner layer of pericardium i.e., epicardium makes the outer lining of
  heart wall.
• Myocardium: Beneath epicardium, there is the thickest layer of heart wall i.e.,
  myocardium. Myocardium is made of cardiac muscles (Cardiomyocytes).
• Endocardium: Endocardium is present beneath myocardium. It is a single layer of
  epithelial cells and make the inner linings of heart chambers.
★ Note: All questions and paragraphs marked with a star ★ are explanations of the Box
  Information provided in the textbook.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Pericardium
Fibrous Serous Parietal Visceral
pericardium pericardium pericardium pericardium
Parietal
pericardium
Visceral
pericardium
Myocardium
Endocardium Pericardial
fluid
Pericardium Fig: Pericardium and heart wall

Chambers and Valves of Heart
There are four chambers of heart i.e., two upper thin walled and comparatively smaller than
ventricles are called atria and two lower thick-walled and comparatively larger than atria are
called ventricles.
Atria receive blood from body and pass it to ventricles which distribute blood to body.
Septa of Heart
The chambers of human heart are completely separated by septa which are of three types.
• Atria and ventricles are separated by atrioventricular septum.
• The left and right atria are separated from each other by an interatrial septum.
• The left and right ventricles are separated from each other by an interventricular septum.
It is much thicker than the interatrial septum.

Aorta
Superior
vena cava
Pulmonary
trunk
Right
atrium
Pulmonary
valve
Tricuspid
valve
Right
ventricle
Inferior
vena cava
Left
atrium
Aortic
valve
Bicuspid
valve
Left
ventricle
Tricuspid Bicuspid
valve valve
Aortic Pulmonary
valve valve
Fig: Human heart and valves

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 3 ---
Atrioventricular valves: At the entrance points of ventricles (in atrioventricular septum),
there are two atrioventricular valves i.e., a tricuspid valve and a bicuspid valve.
• Tricuspid valve is made of three cusps and is present between right atrium and right
ventricle.
• Bicuspid (mitral) valve is made of two cusps and is present between left atrium and left
ventricle.
• When ventricles contract, tricuspid and bicuspid valves close and prevent the back of flow
of blood into atria.
Semilunar valves: At the exit points of ventricles, there are two semilunar valves (with
shapes like half-moon). These are called pulmonary valve and aortic valve.
• Pulmonary valve is located at the base of pulmonary artery between right ventricle and
pulmonary trunk.
• Aortic valve is present at the base of aorta between left ventricle and aorta.
• When ventricles relax, pulmonary and aortic valves close to prevent back flow of blood
form pulmonary artery and aorta into ventricles.
Q2. Describe the flow of blood through heart as regulated by valves.
Ans. Circulation of Blood through Heart
• Human heart functions as a double pump. It carries out pulmonary circulation (supply of
blood to lungs) and systemic circulation (supply of blood to all organs of body - except
lungs).
• Complete separation of deoxygenated (right side) and oxygenated (left side) blood is
maintained in heart.
Route of deoxygenated blood: The right atrium receives deoxygenated blood from body
via two veins i.e., superior vena cava and interior vena cava. Right atrium passes this blood to
right ventricle via tricuspid valve. When right ventricle contracts, deoxygenated blood is
passed to pulmonary trunk via semilunar pulmonary valve. The pulmonary trunk divides
into left and right pulmonary arteries which carry deoxygenated blood to lungs for
oxygenation.
Route of oxygenated blood: The oxygenated blood from lungs is brought to left atrium by
four pulmonary veins. Left atrium passes this blood to left ventricle via bicuspid (or mitral)
valve. When left ventricle contracts, oxygenated blood is passed to aorta via semilunar aortic
valve. Aorta carries this blood to all parts of body (except lungs).
★ The wall of left ventricle is thicker (about 3 times) than that of the right ventricle because
it has to push the blood to all over body.
Q3. What is heart beat? Describe the stages of cardiac cycle. How abnormal &
normal heart sounds are produced in heart?
Ans. Cardiac Cycle Heartbeat
Definition: The sequence of events that occur during one complete heart beat are called
cardiac cycle.
Heart works in continuous cycles. Its chambers relax and are passively filled with blood from
large veins. Then, its chambers contract and propel the blood throughout body. Its alternating
relaxations and contractions are collectively called a cardiac cycle or one heartbeat.
Stages of cardiac cycle
Cardiac cycle is completed in three distinct stages.

--- Page 4 ---
(i) Cardiac diastole / diastole: In this phase atria are relaxed and being filled with blood, the
ventricles are also relaxed. This relaxed period of heart chambers is called diastole.
(ii) Atrial systole: As blood accumulates in atria, their blood pressure rises, due to which both
of them contract. This is called atrial systole. It passes the blood through tricuspid and
bicuspid valves into the two relaxed ventricles.
(iii) Ventricular systole: When ventricles are filled with blood, both of them contract. This is
called ventricular systole and it pumps the blood to pulmonary and aortic valves open.
Duration of one cardiac
cycle: The total duration of one
complete heart beat or cardiac
cycle is 0.8sec, in which
diastole lasts about 0.4 sec,
atrial systole takes about 0.1
sec, and the ventricular
systole lasts about 0.3 sec. In
one's life, heart beats about 2.5
billion times, without
stopping.
Sounds of Heartbeat
There are two heartbeat sounds
produced during heartbeat i.e.
lubb and dubb which can be
heard by using stethoscope.
1. Lubb sound: When both
ventricles contract
simultaneously to pump
the blood to pulmonary
arteries and aorta, the
tricuspid and bicuspid
valves close and "lubb", sound is produced.
2. Dubb sound: When ventricular systole ends and both ventricles relax simultaneously, the
pulmonary and aortic semilunar valves close and "dubb" sound is produced.
3. Murmurs: If the valves are not closing fully, or if they open narrowly, turbulence is
created within the heart. This turbulence can be heard as a heart murmur. A murmur
sounds like a hiss (hissing or whooshing sound).
★ Most cases of heart murmurs are not serious, and those that prove serious can be corrected
by replacing the damaged valves with artificial ones or with valves taken from an organ donor
Q4. Describe the initiation and control of heartbeat. Also describe the
components of electrical conduction system of heart.
Ans. Control of Heartbeat (Heart Excitation and Contraction)
The control system of heart is composed of following structures:
(i) SA - node
(ii) AV - node
(iii) Bundle of His
(iv) Purkinje fibres (AV-bundle)

--- Page 5 ---
(i) Sinoatrial Node (SA – node): The sinoatrial node consists of a small cluster of cardiac
muscle cells. It is embedded in the upper wall of right atrium. The pumping of heart is
initiated by the Sinoatrial Node (SA node) or pacemaker. Heartbeat starts when SA node
sends electrical impulses to the walls of atria. It causes both atria to contract
simultaneously.
(ii) Atrioventricular node (AV – node): AV-node is made of small cluster of cardiac muscle
cells. It lies at the lower portion of interatrial septum. It receives the impulses from SA-
node and propagates to ventricles through bundle of his.
(iii)Bundle of His/AV – Bundle: It is a group of specialized fibres that transmit electrical
impulses from AV-node to the left and right AV- bundle branches. It is located in
interventricular septum, descending to inner rate the ventricles.
(iv)Purkinje Fibres: These are the network of fibres formed by sub divisions of AV-bundles
that spread throughout the ventricles, causing them to contract upon receiving nerve
impulses from AV-node through AV-bundle.

Fig: Pacemaker and its connections

Stimulation of these fibres causes the ventricles to contract almost simultaneously
• Delay of conductance: There is a delay of about 0.15 second in conductance of impulses
from the SA node to AV node, permitting atrial systole to be completed before ventricular
systole begins.
• Blockage in flow of electrical impulses: If there is some blockage in the flow of the
electrical impulses, or if the impulses initiated by SA node are weak; it may delay the
rhythmicity of heartbeat or stop it.
• Cure of blockage: In such patients of weak SA node, artificial pacemaker is used. It is
a battery – operated device that is surgically transplanted near the AV node. It emits
electrical signals that trigger normal heartbeats.
Control of heart rate
The heart of an average adult beats about 70 times per minute. It pumps the entire blood
volume (about 5 litres) every minute. The normal speed of heartbeat is made and maintained
by pacemaker and AV node.
Role of Brain in controlling heart rate: Brain also exerts some influence on heart rate.
• For example, during fever and exercise, the control centre in brain sends nerve signals
to both the pacemaker and the AV node, making them to increase the heart rate. It is to
cope with the situation.

--- Page 6 ---
• In contrast, when we are asleep or at rest, the brain's control centre slows down the
activity of pacemaker and AV node.
Q5. What is ECG? How does it work? Describe the main components of ECG
wave form along with their clinical significances?
Ans. Electrocardiogram
The recording of electrical potentials, generated by the currents of cardiac impulses, is known
as electrocardiogram (ECG).
When cardiac impulse passes over the surface of heart, a minute electrical current is generated.
This current spreads into the tissues surrounding heart. This minute electrical current also
travels to the surface of body from here these electrical potentials are recorded using ECG
machine.
Electrocardiograph
In ECG, the electrical potentials
generated by cardiac impulses current are
measured and recorded. For this purpose,
electrodes are placed on skin on the
opposite sides of heart. The electrodes are
attached to a machine called
electrocardiograph that records electrical
potentials generated by this current.
ECG helps to diagnose the abnormalities
in conduction system of heart. ECG
shows the following waves of electrical
impulses produced at specific events of
cardiac cycle.
1. P wave: It shows beginning of atrial depolarization, initiated by SA node. It causes atrial
contraction.
• Abnormalities: Irregular or absent P waves may indicate arrhythmia (lack of
rhythmicity).
2. PR segment: It shows the completion of atrial depolarization. It is usually 0.12 to 0.20
seconds.
• Abnormalities: A prolonged PR indicates a first-degree heart block.
3. QRS: It shows the beginning of depolarization of ventricles. Atrial repolarization also
occurs during this phase.
• Abnormalities: Abnormalities in the QRS complex may indicate bundle branch
block, ventricular tachycardia (faster rate of contraction), or other ventricular
abnormalities.
4. ST segment: It shows the completion of depolarization of ventricles.
• Abnormalities: It can be depressed in ischemia (decreased flow of blood and oxygen
to heart muscles) and elevated in myocardial infarction. This segment ordinarily lasts
about 0.08 second.

--- Page 7 ---
5. T wave: It represents the beginning of repolarization of ventricles.
• Abnormalities: T wave abnormalities may indicate electrolyte disturbance. The hyper acute T wave shows the earliest findings of acute myocardial infarction.
6. QT interval: The QT interval is from the beginning of the QRS complex to the end of the T wave. A normal QT interval is usually about 0.40 seconds, it represents the time taken by ventricles to depolarize and then repolarize.
• Abnormalities: Deviation in QT interval usually increase the risk of arrhythmias.

BLOOD VESSELS
Q6. Describe the detailed structure of arteries veins and capillaries.
Ans. Blood Vessels
Arteries, veins and capillaries are the main blood vessels in human circulatory system.
1. Arteries
Arteries are the blood vessels which carry blood away from heart to different parts of body. All arteries carry oxygenated blood, except pulmonary arteries. The central core of artery is lumen.
• Walls of arteries: The walls of arteries are made up of three layers.
i. Tunica externa or adventitia: It is the Outer layer of arteries made of connective and elastic tissue.
ii. Tunica media: It is the middle layer of arteries made of thick muscular tissue and elastic fibres. Middle layer is important and it can withstand higher blood pressure during ventricular systole.
iii. Tunica intima: It is the Inner layer of arteries made of thin layer of endothelial cells.
• Arterioles: Arterioles are the sub-divisions of arteries, which leads to capillaries. Arterioles divide repeatedly until they form a dense network of very fine branches i.e., capillaries.
2. Capillaries
These vessels are formed by the division of arterioles. Capillaries join to form venules. Capillaries penetrate all tissues and have approach to the cellular level.
• Walls of capillaries: The walls of capillaries are made of a single layer of endothelial cells. The internal diameter of a capillary is about 8 micrometres.
• Function of capillaries: Capillaries are the sites where materials are exchanged between blood and body tissues by diffusion or active transport. Water and diffusible substances can pass through capillary walls.

--- Page 8 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Materials pass through the endothelial cells or through the intercellular spaces of capillary
wall. Some materials are also taken up by the cell of capillary wall by endocytosis. The
capillary wall cells then pass these materials to the other side by exocytosis.
Interstitial fluid: The pressure within capillaries causes a continuous leakage of fluid from
the blood plasma into tissues. This fluid, known as interstitial fluid consists of water with
dissolved nutrients, hormones, gases, wastes and small proteins. Large proteins, RBCs and
platelets remain within capillaries. But some
WBCS can squeeze out through the
intercellular spaces of capillary wall.
3. Veins
The blood vessels carry blood from different
parts of the body towards heart. All veins
carry deoxygenated blood except pulmonary
veins.
Walls of veins: The wall of veins has same
three layers as are present in arteries.
• Tunica externa (adventitia): It is the
outer layer of veins, made of connective
and elastic tissue.
• Tunica media: It is the middle layer of
veins, relatively thin and only slightly
muscular, with few elastic fibres.
• Tunica intima: It is the inner layer of veins, made of thin layer of endothelial cells.
• The middle layer of veins is relatively
thinner than that of arteries because veins do
not have to withstand high blood pressure.
• Semilunar valves are present in veins to
prevent the back flow of blood, as it is
moving towards heart.
• The pressure generated by the
contraction of surrounding muscles
presses veins and assists in the return of
blood towards heart.
Relationship of arterioles, capillaries
and venules: Smaller veins join to form
lager veins and ultimately from vena cavae
(inferior vena cava and superior vena cava),
which pour blood into the right atrium of
heart. Pulmonary veins from lungs empty in
left atrium.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 9 ---
Q7. Describe the role of precapillary sphincters in regulating the flow of blood
through capillaries.
Ans. Regulation of Blood Flow in Capillaries
The amount of blood flowing in capillaries is controlled by constricting or dilating the
capillaries.
Capillaries do not have smooth muscles in their wall, so the diameter of a capillary is
controlled by some other factors, such as by nervous stimulation, as well as by chemicals.
Nervous stimulation can constrict capillaries and certain chemicals such as histamine can
dilate them. Some capillaries are connected with arterioles and venules through loops of other
capillaries.
When the tissues suffer from hypoxia
(that is low supply of oxygen) or need
more nutrients the diameter of the
capillaries is increased by vasodilators.
The entry of each loop is guarded by a
ring of muscles called a pre-capillary
sphincter. These sphincters regulate the
amount of blood flowing through
capillaries. as they are made up of
smooth muscles, that contract or relax to
change the diameter of capillaries.
When the body needs oxygen and
nutrients the precapillary sphincters are
allowed to relax, in order to increase
blood flow to capillaries.
When the body is at rest or asleep, the precapillary sphincters constrict under the effect of
nervous stimulation to reduce the flow of blood towards tissues.
Q8. How the flow of blood is regulated in arterioles? How it is related to
metabolic activity in a cell?
Ans. Vasoconstriction in Arterioles: In the walls of arterioles, there are more circular
muscles than elastic tissue. The contraction of the circular muscles of arterioles is under the
control of nervous and endocrine systems. When these muscles contract, arterioles are
constricted. It is called vasoconstriction. It reduces the flow of blood in arterioles.
Vasodilation in Arterioles: When these muscles are relaxed, arterioles are dilated. It is called
vasodilation and it increases blood flow in them.

--- Page 10 ---
Regulation of blood flow and metabolic activity of tissues
Vasoconstriction and vasodilation happen in response to changes in metabolic activity of
tissues.
For example, when metabolic activity in a tissue rises, oxygen decrease and carbon dioxide
increases in its interstitial fluid. In its response, the circular muscles of the arterioles in that
tissue relax (vasodilation). It increases blood flow in these arterioles and also in capillaries.
The increase blood flow supplies more oxygen and removes more carbon dioxide. Similarly,
decreased metabolic activity causes vasoconstriction of arterioles.
Q9. Write the components of pulmonary circulation?
Ans. Pulmonary Circulation
Blood circulation from heart to lungs and from lungs back to heart is called pulmonary
circulation.
At the level of heart:
Pulmonary circulation
supplies deoxygenated
blood to lungs and returns
oxygenated blood to
heart. A big artery i.e.
pulmonary trunk carries
deoxygenated blood from
the right ventricle of
heart. Pulmonary trunk
divides into right and left
pulmonary arteries which
carry deoxygenated blood
to the right and left lungs.
At the level of lungs:
Inside each lung, the
pulmonary artery divides
and makes pulmonary
arterioles and lung
capillaries in lung
capillaries, blood is
oxygenated. Lung capillaries join to form pulmonary venules, which join to form pulmonary
vein. Left and right pulmonary veins from lungs open in left atrium.
Q10. Define systematic circulation. What are main components of systematic
circulation.
Ans. Coronary Circulation
Definition: The systemic circulation supplies oxygenated blood to all the cells, tissues and
organs of the body (except lungs) and returns deoxygenated blood to heart. The heart walls
are supplied with blood through a small portion of the systemic circulation. It consists of
following components.

--- Page 11 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Two coronary arteries i.e., right and left coronary arteries arise from aorta, near its origin.
These arteries divide into many smaller arteries, arterioles and then into capillaries.
After supplying oxygenated blood to heart muscles, the capillaries unite to form venules which
make many coronary veins.

Aorta
Coronary
veins
Coronary
sinus
Right
coronary
artery
Left coronary
artery
Right coronary
artery
(Posterior view)
Fig: Coronary circulation

The coronary veins join to form a coronary sinus which opens in right atrium. Small coronary
veins drain directly into right atrium.
Hepatic Portal Circulation
A portal system is a circulation in
which veins end in capillaries.
In hepatic portal system, a large
hepatic portal vein collects blood
from spleen and alimentary canal and
take it to liver. The blood from liver is
taken to heart through hepatic veins.
The blood that comes from alimentary
canal to liver contains substances that
are absorbed from small intestine.
Purpose of hepatic portal
circulation: These substances pass
through liver before going to heart
liver removes harmful substances
from blood and absorbs nutrients for
storage before sending this blood to
heart. Hepatic portal system extends
from the lower portion of
oesophagus to the upper part of anal
canal.

Inferior
vena cava
Hepatic
veins
Spleen
Pancreas
Hepatic
portal vein
Ascending
colon
Descending
colon
Small
intestine
Fig: Hepatic portal system

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 12 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Renal Circulation
It is another important component of the systemic circulation. Right and left renal arteries
carry oxygenated blood to the right and left kidneys.
Inside the kidney, each renal artery divides repeatedly to make smaller arteries which branch
into several afferent arterioles, and supply blood to nephrons (units of kidney). Each afferent
arteriole divides to make the capillaries of glomeruli.

Peri-tubular Efferent arteriole
capillaries                                Glomerulus
                                                              Afferent arteriole
                                                              Smaller
                                                              arteries
                                                                                             Renal
                                                                                             vein
Vasa
recta
                                Venule Smaller
                                       vein
                                                                                             Renal
                                                                                             artery

                                          Fig: Renal portal system

The capillaries of glomeruli unite to make efferent arteriole, which divides to make two sets
of capillaries i.e., (i) peri-tubular capillaries (around nephron tubule in cortical portion of
kidney in cortical nephrons), and (ii) vasa recta (around nephron tubule in the medulla of
kidney in juxtamedullary nephrons). These capillaries unite to form venules that converge and
make smaller veins. The smaller veins unit to form a renal vein.
BLOOD PRESSURE
Q11. Define blood pressure, explain systolic and diastolic pressures?
Ans. Blood Pressure
Blood pressure is the measure of force exerted by blood against the inner walls of blood
vessels. This force keeps blood flowing from heart to the entire capillary network in body.
Although such a pressure occurs throughout the vascular system, the term blood pressure most
commonly refers to systemic arterial blood pressure. Blood pressure in highest in aorta and
then gradually reduces in systemic arteries. The walls of arteries are elastic. The flow of blood
creates rhythmical throbbing of arteries, which is called as pulse. The pulse can be felt in wrist
(radial pulse), thighs (femoral pulse) side of neck (carotid pulse), with the help of index and
middle fingers.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 13 ---
Component of blood pressure
There are two main components of
blood pressure.
(i) Systolic pressure
(ii) Diastolic pressure
(i) Systolic pressure: The maximum
pressure during ventricular systole
or ventricular contraction is called
systolic pressure When ventricles
contract (ventricular systole),
heart forces blood into pulmonary
arteries and aorta. As a result, the
pressure in these arteries rises
sharply.. Systolic pressure in a
normal young adult is 120mm Hg.
(ii) Diastolic pressure: The lowest
pressure that remains in arteries
before the next ventricular
contraction, or the blood pressure when the heart muscles are relaxed, is called diastolic
pressure. Arterial blood pressure rises and falls corresponding to the phases of cardiac
cycle. When ventricles relax (diastole), the arterial pressure drops. Diastolic pressure in a
normal young adult is 80 mm Hg.
Expression of blood pressure: Conventionally, the readings of blood pressure are expressed
as 120/80. The instrument sphygmomanometer is used for the manual measurement of
systolic and diastolic blood pressures. In this instrument, rise and fall in mercury column
shows the readings of blood pressure.
Q12. Elaborate the mechanism of short term and long term regulation of blood
pressure?
Ans. Role of baroreceptors / pressure receptors in short term regulation
Location of pressure receptors: Pressure receptors, known as baroreceptors are present in
carotid arteries (arteries that supply blood to the head region and brain) and aortic arch
(portion of artery that bends between the ascending and descending aorta).
During low blood pressure: When blood pressure falls, baroreceptors activate sensory
neurons that send information to brain. The control centre in brain reacts by increasing the
rate and force of contraction of heart, and by causing vasoconstriction in arterioles. Both these
changes restore blood pressure to normal.
Long Term Regulation
Role of hormones: The long-term regulation of blood pressure is done through hormones.
Certain hormones regulate the volume of blood by affecting the reabsorption of water and
salts in kidneys.
Decreased blood volume and pressure: When there is a decrease in blood volume and blood
pressure, special receptor presents in brain create thirst. They also stimulate posterior
pituitary gland to secrete antidiuretic hormone (ADH). ADH stimulates kidneys to retain

--- Page 14 ---


--- Page 15 ---
catheter through the large arteries of
body. When the tip of catheter reaches
the opening of coronary arteries, a special
fluid (called a contrast medium or dye) is
injected in catheter. This fluid is visible in
x-ray machine.
• Pictures (angiograms) of fluid in
coronary artery are obtained. If clots are
present in the lumen of a coronary artery,
the artery appears narrow.
• By changing the diagnostic catheter to a
guiding catheter, physicians can also pass
an instrument into coronary artery
through the catheter The most commonly
used instruments are guide wires and
balloon dilation catheters.

Fig: An angiogram showing blood flow
in coronary arteries

Q15. Co-relate angina pectoris and heart attack (myocardial infarction). Write
a note on angina pectoris, heart attack and heart failure.
Ans. Angina pectoris: Blockage of coronary arteries is usually due to gradual build-up of
lipids (especially cholesterol) in the inner wall of coronary artery. If such conditions persist,
chest pain, called angina pectoris can result during periods of stress or physical exertion.
Angina indicates that oxygen demands are greater than its delivery and a heart attack may occur
in future.
Myocardial infarction: Coronary arteries supply oxygen and nutrients to cardiac muscles. If
blood flow is blocked in coronary arteries, it results in insufficient supply of blood to one
or more parts of cardiac muscle. If heart muscles die due to supply of oxygen and nutrients,
the condition is known as myocardial infarction (heart attack).
★Recovery from a heart attack is possible if the damaged portion of heart is small enough
that the other blood vessels in heart can enlarge their capacity and resupply the damaged
tissues.
• If lifestyle changes and medication haven't relieved the symptoms or if the narrowed
coronary arteries are at imminent risk of a heart attack, coronary bypass surgery or
angioplasty is performed.
Q16. Define open heart surgery. Outline the main principles of coronary bypass,
angioplasty and Stenting.
Ans. Open heart surgery
★The open or beating-heart surgery is done when heart is still beating which include bypass
surgery, valvular replacement, heart transplants etc.
1. Coronary Bypass: Open heart surgery is one of the most common and effective
procedures to compensate the blockage of blood to cardiac muscles. In this surgery,
surgeon takes a healthy blood vessel from leg, arm, chest or abdomen of the patient. He

--- Page 16 ---
attaches the ends of blood vessel above and below the blocked coronary artery. So, blood
is bypassed around the damaged or blocked area.
Post-Operative care
Coronary bypass surgery
doesn't cure the underlying
disease process i.e.,
atherosclerosis or coronary
artery disease, one should
follow post-operative care to
minimize its recurrence by
making changes in lifestyles.
• Lifestyle changes
especially smoking
cessation is crucial to
reduce the chance of
future blockages and heart
attacks, even after
successful bypass surgery.
• Reducing certain types of fat in diet, increasing physical activity, and controlling high
blood pressure, diabetes and other risk factors for heart disease.
2. Angioplasty: Angioplasty is an
invasive procedure that opens a
blocked or narrowed artery.
During an angioplasty, a small
wire called a catheter, under x-
ray guidance, is passed through
the narrowed coronary artery. A
small sausage-shaped balloon is
then advanced over the wire into
the narrowed section of artery.
The balloon is then inflated to
dilate the narrowed section of the
artery. Once the artery is dilated,
a small amount of dye is injected
to confirm the successful
dilatation.
3. Stenting: Stenting may also be
done during angioplasty. A stent is an expandable stainless stell mesh tube, mounted on
balloon catheter.
• When stent/balloon is positioned within the narrow artery, the balloon is inflated
during angioplasty.

--- Page 17 ---
• The inflated balloon expands the stent and the artery. The balloon is removed and the
stent remains in place. The stent supports the artery walls and keeps the artery open
and dilated.
Q17. Define hypertension and describe the factors that regulate blood pressure
and can lead to hypertension and hypotension. / Define hypertension and
hypotension alongwith their causes. Describe the organ damage due to
hypertension.
Ans. (A) Hypertension
It is a medical condition in which a person suffers from a chronic (long lasting) consistent
elevated level of blood pressure above 140/90mmHg.
Causes: Any abnormality in nervous or hormonal mechanisms of blood pressure regulation
may cause hypertension.
• Other causes of hypertension include stress, obesity, high salt intake, and smoking.
• There may also be hereditary reasons of hypertension.
Organ Damage due to Hypertension
1. Brain haemorrhage: Whenever blood pressure is chronically elevated, there is an
increased chance of the rupture of blood vessels. When this occurs in brain, it is called
brain haemorrhage. It damages the delicate structure of brain leading to loss of functioning
corresponding structures.
2. Congestive heart failure: Hypertension also weakens cardiac muscles. If hypertension is
prolonged, heart is unable to pump effectively and blood flow cannot be maintained to
meet needs of tissues. In such conditions, blood may be retained in heart and lungs. It
is called congestive heart failure.
3. Damage to kidneys: Hypertension can also damage the nephrons of kidneys. It leads to
further retention of salts and water in blood and therefore further accelerating
hypertension.
(B) Hypotension: Hypotension or low blood pressure is a condition in which the force of
blood against the walls of arteries falls below 90/60mmHg.
Causes
• Medical conditions: e.g., bradycardia (slow heart rate), heart failure, valve disease.
• Endocrine disorders: Hypothyroidism, hypoglycaemia.
• Blood loss: Trauma, surgery, internal bleeding.
• Dehydration: from vomiting diarrhoea, insufficient fluid intake.
LYMPHATIC SYSTEM OF HUMAN
Q18. Describe the structure and role of lymph capillaries, lymph vessels and
lymph ducts? / Describe the components, role and functions of lymphatic system.
Ans. Lymphatic System of Human
In humans, in addition to the blood circulatory system, there is another system responsible for
the transport of materials. It also returns the materials from tissues to blood. This system is
called lymphatic system.
Components of lymphatic system: It consists of lymph vessels, lymphoid masses, lymph
nodes and lymph-the fluid which flows in the system.

--- Page 18 ---


--- Page 19 ---

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch11 Long Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [8/36]: 11th Bio New Ch11 MCQ's.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
Unit 11: Human Circulatory System

Multiple Choice Questions

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)

1. Compared to vein an artery.
(a) Has thinner walls
(b) Is located more superficially
(c) Carries blood away from an organ
(d) Has no internal valves

2. Bicuspid valve guards the opening
between
(a) Stomach and intestine
(b) Pulmonary vein and left atrium
(c) Right atrium and right ventricle
(d) Left atrium and left ventricle

3. What is the state of bicuspid and
tricuspid valves at the end of the first
heart sound?
(a) Bicuspid is closed, tricuspid is open
(b) Bicuspid is open, tricuspid is closed
(c) Both are open
(d) Both are closed

4. By beating at normal speed, our heart
pumps how much blood per minute?

(a) 2 liters
(c) 5 liters
(b) 3 liters
(d) 8 liters

--- Page 2 ---
5. Closure of tricuspid and bicuspid
valves produces sound;
(a) Lubb
(b) Dubb
(c) First Lubb then Dubb
(d) None of these but – murmurs
6. SA-node initiates heartbeat in;
(a) Right atrium only
(b) Right atrium and partially left also
(c) Right and left both atria
(d) Left atrium and partially right also
7. Systolic pressure in young man is;
(a) 60 mm of Hg
(b) 80 mm of Hg
(c) 100 mm of Hg
(d) 120 mm of Hg

8. Blood pressure is highest in____ and
blood moves; most slowly in;
(a) Veins, capillaries
(b) Arteries, capillaries
(c) Capillaries, arteries
(d) Veins, arteries
9. Instead of normal lubb-dubb sound, a
lubb-hiss, lubb-hiss sound indicates;
(a) Blocked coronary artery
(b) Damaged pacemaker
(c) Defective semilunar valve
(d) High blood pressure
10. In humans which one is the other
system for the transport of materials,
then blood circulatory system?
(a) Lymphatic system
(b) Digestive system
(c) Nervous system
(d) Respiratory system

SLO BASED MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS

Structure and Functioning of Heart
★11. In a healthy person, plasma
constitutes about ______ by volume.
(a) 45%
(b) 55%
(c) 65%
(d) 90%
12. Which one of the following is not the
part of human blood circulatory
system?
(a) Lymph
(b) Arteries
(c) Heart
(d) Capillaries
13. Human heart is situated in the ____
of chest cavity.
(a) Upper part
(b) Middle
(c) Lower region
(d) Behind
14. The human heart is felt to be on the
left side of chest because.
(a) It is located in left side
(b) It is present below the diaphragm
(c) It is located in right side
(d) The left side of heart is stronger and
larger

15. The sac in which heart is enclosed:
(a) Myocardium (b) Pericardium
(c) Endocardium (d) Pleura
16. The inner layer of pericardium is
called:
(a) Fibrous epicardium
(b) Serous pericardium
(c) Synovial membrane
(d) Endocardium
17. The space between parietal and visceral
pericardium is called ___, having how
many milliliter of pericardial fluid:
(a) Pleural, 100ml
(b) Peritoneal cavity, 50ml
(c) Oral cavity, 75ml
(d) Pericardial cavity, 50ml
18. Which one of the following is not
related to heart wall?
(a) Pericardium (b) Epicardium
(c) Myocardium (d) Endocardium

--- Page 3 ---
19. Inner visceral pericardium is closely
attached to the underlying heart, and is
also known as:
(a) Fibrous pericardium
(b) Epicardium
(c) Parietal pericardium
(d) Endocardium
20. Inner most layer of heart wall is called:
(a) Endocardium
(b) Pericardium
(c) Myocardium
(d) Epicardium
21. The left and right ventricles are
separated by:
(a) Interventricular septum
(b) Intraventricular septum
(c) Extraventricular septum
(d) Atrioventricular valves
22. Mitral valve is present between:
(a) Right atrium and right ventricle
(b) Left atrium and left ventricle
(c) Right ventricle and left ventricle
(d) Left atrium and right atrium
23. The valves which prevent backflow of
blood into atria are;
(a) Atrioventricular valves
(b) Semilunar valves
(c) Aortic valve
(d) Pulmonary valve
24. Identify the marked structure:
(a) Tricuspid valve
(b) Bicuspid valve
(c) Aortic valve
(d) Pulmonary valve
25. The thickness of left ventricle is about_
times more than right ventricle.
(a) 3
(b) 5
(c) 10
(d) 12
26. The vessels which bring oxygenated
blood from lungs to the heart are:
(a) Pulmonary arteries
(b) Pulmonary capillaries
(c) Pulmonary veins
(d) Thoracic duct

27. Aorta supply oxygenated blood to all
parts of body except:
(a) Pancreas
(b) Spleen
(c) Brain
(d) Lungs
28. During ventricular systole blood is
pumped to:
(a) Pulmonary arteries
(b) Aorta
(c) Both (a) and (b)
(d) Pulmonary veins
29. The longest phase of cardiac cycle is _
and lasts about:
(a) Ventricular systole, 0.3 sec
(b) Atrial systole, 0.4 sec
(c) Diastole, 0.4 sec
(d) Atrial systole, 0.1 sec
30. “Dubb” heart sound is produced when:
(a) Semilunar valves are close
(b) Semilunar valves are open
(c) AV-valves are open
(d) AV-valves are close
31. If the heart valves are not fully closed,
turbulence is created, sounds like hiss
is called:
(a) Lubb
(b) Dubb
(c) Murmur
(d) Both (a) and (b)
32. Sinoatrial node (SA node) is embedded
in the upper wall of ___:
(a) Right atrium (b) Right ventricle
(c) Left atrium (d) Left ventricle
33. Small cluster of cardiac muscle cells,
located at the lower portion of
interatrial septum is:
(a) SA node
(b) AV-node
(c) Bundle of his (d) Purkinje fibres
34. A battery-operated device, which emits
electrical signals that trigger normal
heart beats is called:
(a) Natural pace maker
(b) Artificial pace maker
(c) Dialyzer
(d) Stent

--- Page 4 ---
★35. The average heart rate of an adult is
about _________ times per minute.
(a) 60 (b) 80
(c) 70 (d) 100
36. In an adult human_____ litres of
blood move through blood vessels
every day.
(a) 800 (b) 8000
(c) 80,000 (d) 5
37. In an adult about 8000 litres of blood
move _________ of blood vessels
daily.
(a) 96 km (b) 960 km
(c) 9600 km (d) 96000 km
38. The device / machine that records
electrical signals generated by cardiac
impulses is called:
(a) Electrocardiogram
(b) Electroencephalogram
(c) Electrocardiograph
(d) Echocardiogram
39. The component of ECG-wave form
that shows beginning of atrial
depolarization is
(a) P-wave (b) T-wave
(c) QRS (d) PR-segment
40. The component of ECG wave form;
from the beginning of QRS complex to
the end of T-wave is:
(a) PR-segment (b) ST-segment
(c) P-wave (d) QT interval
41. ST-segment of ECG-wave form lasts
for about:
(a) 0.12 sec (b) 0.20 sec
(c) 0.08 sec (d) 0.40 sec
42. Ventricular abnormalities can be
diagnosed when ECG shows abnormal
(a) P-wave (b) PR-segment
(c) QRS-complex (d) QT-interval

★43. The temporary channel between
embryonic pulmonary artery and
aorta is:
(a) Foramen magnum
(b) Interatrial foramen
(c) Thoracic duct
(d) Ductus arteriosus
★44. Tunica media of arteries is made up
of:
(a) Connective tissue
(b) Elastic tissue
(c) Muscular tissue and elastic fibres
(d) Endothelium and connective tissue
45. The blood vessels which carry blood
away from heart are:
(a) Arteries (b) Veins
(c) Capillaries (d) Venules
46. The walls of capillaries are made up of:
(a) Muscular tissue
(b) Elastic fibres
(c) Connective tissue
(d) Endothelial cells
47. The internal diameter of a capillary is
about:
(a) 8 µm (b) 4mm
(c) 16 nm (d) 26 µm
48. Which of the following is not a part of
interstitial fluid?
(a) RBCs (b) Hormones
(c) Water (d) Gases
49. The middle layer of veins is relatively
thinner than that of arteries because:
(a) They do not have muscular tissue
(b) They lack elastic fibres
(c) They do not have to with stand high
blood pressure
(d) They have endothelium
50. The black flow of blood in veins is
prevented by the presence of:
(a) Semilunar valves
(b) AV-valves
(c) Sphincter of oddi
(d) Cardiac sphincter

--- Page 5 ---
51. The sphincters that regulate the
amount of blood flowing through
capillaries are:
(a) Pre-capillary sphincters
(b) Post-capillary sphincters
(c) Inter-capillary sphincters
(d) Intra-capillary sphincters
52. When metabolic activity in a tissue
rises, oxygen decreases and CO2
increases in its interstitial fluid. How
does homeostatic feedback respond to
this situation?
(a) Vasodilation
(b) Vasoconstriction
(c) Both (a) and (b)
(d) Stimulation of Vagus nerve
53. The velocity of blood flow in capillaries
is:
(a) 450-500 mm/sec
(b) 01 mm/sec
(c) 250mm/sec
(d) 300 mm/sec
54. The systemic circulation supplies
oxygenated blood to all (the cells,
tissues and organs) systems of the body
EXCEPT:
(a) Respiratory system
(b) Hepatic-portal system
(c) Immune system
(d) Nervous system
55. Small coronary veins drain directly
into:
(a) Left atrium (b) Right atrium
(c) Left ventricle (d) Right ventricle
56. The hepatic portal vein collects blood
from:
(a) Spleen
(b) Alimentary canal
(c) Reproductive system
(d) Both (a) and (b)

Blood Pressure
57. The flow of blood creates rhythmical
throbbing of arteries. Which is called:
(a) Pulse (b) Anaphylaxis
(c) Blood pressure (d) Spurt
58. The receptors which detect/monitor
ups and down in blood pressure are:
(a) Baroreceptors
(b) Nociceptors
(c) Thermoreceptors
(d) Pacinian corpuscles
59. Baroreceptors/pressure receptors are
present in:
(a) Carotid arteries(b) Aortic arch
(c) Juglar vein (d) Both (a) and (b)
60. Long-term regulation of blood
pressure is done through:
(a) Enzymes (b) Hormones
(c) Neurotransmitters(d) Cerebrum
61. The hormone which stimulates kidneys
to retain more water in blood,
excreting less in urine is:
(a) ANH (b) ADH
(c) ACTH (d) TSH
62. Which of the following hormones, is
secreted by heart?
(a) ANH (b) Corticosterone
(c) Prolactin (d) Adrenaline
Cardiovascular Disorders
63. Hardening of arterial walls as a result
of calcium deposition in arterial walls
is termed as:
(a) Thrombosis
(b) Atherosclerosis
(c) Arteriosclerosis
(d) angiogenesis
64. X-ray examination of blood vessels or
chambers of heart to create x-ray
pictures is called:
(a) Angiogram
(b) Angioplasty
(c) Angiography
(d) Echocardiography

--- Page 6 ---
65. The causes of thrombosis are:
(a) Reduced rate of blood flow
(b) Infection of lining of blood vessels
(c) Pneumonia T.B
(d) All of above
66. Thrombosis in the vessels of brain
causes:
(a) Hemorrhage (b) Stroke
(c) Myocardial infraction (d) Epilepsy
67. The death of heart muscles due to lack
of oxygen and nutrients is called:

(a) Myocardial infarction
(b) Myocardial infection
(c) Myocarditis
(d) All of above
68. If life styles changes and medication
fails to relieve the symptoms of heart
attack, how will you proceed?
(a) Preform ECG
(b) Go for bypass surgery
(c) Consult a cardiologist for angioplasty
(d) Both (b) and (c)
69. The procedure which involves taking a
healthy blood vessel from leg, arm,
chest or abdomen and attaching the
ends of blood vessel above or below the
blocked coronary artery is called:
(a) Angioplasty
(b) Angiography
(c) Bypass surgery
(d) Stenting
70. The procedure that opens a blocked or
narrowed artery is called:
(a) Angioplasty (b) Angiography
(c) Stenting (d) Bypass surgery
71. An expandable stainless steel mesh
tube, mounted on a balloon catheter,
during angioplasty is called
(a) Fistula (b) Cannula
(c) Catheter (d) Stent

72. A chronic elevation in blood pressure
which consistently remain above
140/90 mmHg is called:
(a) Thromboembolism
(b) Hypertension
(c) Congestive heart failure
(d) Hemorrhage
Lymphatic System of Humans
73. The branches of lymph capillaries in
villi are called:
(a) Lymphatic ducts
(b) Thoracic duct
(c) Lacteals
(d) Lymphoid masses
74. The ultimate flow of lymph is always
from body tissues towards:
(a) Lymph nodes
(b) Thoracic duct
(c) Thoracic capillaries
(d) Lymphoid masses
75. The veins that drain blood from arms
and shoulders to the heart are called:
(a) Pulmonary veins
(b) Thoracic veins
(c) Subclavian veins
(d) Coronary veins
76. Blood filtration through its
macrophages and lymphocytes,
storage of RBCs belongs to:
(a) Spleen (b) Bone marrow
(c) Liver (d) Thymus
77. Several afferent lymph vessels enter a
lymph node and the lymph is drained
by ________ lymph vessel/vessels.
(a) Single efferent
(b) Several afferent
(c) Single afferent
(d) All of above
78. Which one of the following is not larger
lymphoid mass?
(a) Spleen (b) Thymus
(c) Adenoids (d) Lymph nodes
79. The velocity of blood is highest in:

(a) Inferior vena cava
(b) Superior vena cava
(c) Aorta
(d) Thoracic duct

--- Page 7 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

ANSWER KEY
1. d 2. d 3. d 4. c 5. A 6. c 7. d 8. b
9. c 10. a 11. b 12. a 13. b 14. d 15. b 16. b
17. d 18. a 19. b 20. a 21. a 22. b 23. a 24. c
25. a 26. c 27. d 28. c 29. c 30. a 31. c 32. a
33. b 34. b 35. c 36. b 37. d 38. c 39. a 40. d
41. c 42. c 43. d 44. c 45. a 46. d 47. a 48. a
49. c 50. a 51. a 52. a 53. b 54. a 55. b 56. d
57. a 58. a 59. d 60. b 61. b 62. a 63. c 64. c
65. d 66. b 67. a 68. d 69. c 70. a 71. d 72. b
73. c 74. b 75. c 76. a 77. a 78. d 79. c

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch11 MCQ's.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [9/36]: 11th Bio New Ch11 Short Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 11: Human Circulatory System

Short Questions

SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS EXERCISE

Q1. What is the main difference
between the walls of an artery and a vein?
Arterial walls
• The walls of
arteries are made
up of three layers.
• Outer layer i.e.,
tunica externa or
adventitia is made
of connective and
elastic tissue.
• Middle layer i.e.,
tunica media is
made of thick
muscular tissue
and elastic fibres.
• Inner layer i.e.,
tunica intima is
made of thin layer
of endothelial
cells.

Venous wall
• The wall of veins
has same three
layers as are
present in arteries.
• The outer layer
i.e., tunica
externa
(adventitia) is
made of
connective and
elastic tissue.
• The middle layer
i.e., tunica media
is relatively thin
and only slightly
muscular, with
few elastic fibres.
• The inner layer
i.e., tunica intima
is made of thin
layer of
endothelial cells.

Q2. Enlist the four valves present in
heart and also state their locations.
Ans. AV-Valves: At the entrance points of
ventricles (in atrioventricular septum), there
are two atrioventricular valves i.e., a
tricuspid valve and a bicuspid valve.
• Tricuspid valve (made of three cusps) is
present between right atrium and right
ventricle.
• Bicuspid (mitral) valve (made up of two
cusps) is present between left atrium and
left ventricle.
• Semilunar Valves: At the exit points of
ventricles, there are two semilunar valves
(with shapes like a half-moon).
There are two semilunar valves;
• Pulmonary valve is located at the base of
pulmonary artery between right ventricle
and pulmonary trunk.
• Aortic valve is located at the base aorta
between left ventricle and aorta.

Q3. State the phases of heartbeat.

Ans. There are three phase of heart beat.
1. Diastole: When atria are relaxed and being
filled with blood, the ventricles are also

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
relaxed. This relaxed period of heart
chambers is called diastole.
2. Atrial systole: As blood accumulates in
atria, their blood pressure rises, due to
which both of them contract. This is called
atrial systole. It passes the blood through
tricuspid and bicuspid valves into the two
relaxed ventricles.
3. Ventricular systole: When ventricles are
filled with blood, both of them contract.
This is called ventricular systole and it
pumps the blood to pulmonary arteries and
aorta.
Duration: In one complete heartbeat,
diastole lasts about 0.4 sec, atrial systole
takes about 0.1 sec, and the ventricular
systole lasts about 0.3 sec.
Q4. List the principles and use of
Electrocardiogram.
Ans. Principle: When cardiac impulse
passes over the surface of heart a minute
electrical current is generated. This current
spreads into the tissues surrounding heart.
This minute electrical current also travels to
the surface of body.
• In ECG, the electrical potentials generated
by this current are measured and recorded.
For this purpose, electrodes are placed on
skin on the opposite sides of heart. The
electrodes are attached to a machine called
electrocardiograph that records electrical
potentials generated by this current.
Uses: ECG helps to diagnose the
abnormalities and abnormal rhythms in
conduction system of heart.
Q5. Define angiography and angioplasty.

Ans. Angiography
Coronary angiography is an X-ray
examination of blood vessels or chambers of
heart. In order to create the X-ray pictures, a
physician guides a small tube-like device
called catheter through the large arteries of
body fluid (contrast medium) is injected and
pictures (angiograms) are obtained.
Angioplasty
Angioplasty is a procedure that opens a
blocked or narrowed artery. During an
angioplasty, a small wire called a catheter,
under X-ray guidance is passed through the
narrowed coronary artery the balloon is
advanced through wire and inflated to dilate
the narrowed section of block artery.
Q6. What is meant by Purkinje fibres?

Ans. These are the network of fibres
formed by the division of AV-bundles in the
walls of ventricles. Stimulation of these
fibres causes the ventricles to contract almost
simultaneously.
Q7. What do you mean by
vasoconstriction and vasodilation?
Ans. Vasoconstriction: It is the decrease
in diameter of a blood vessel due to
contraction of smooth circular muscles, in
the walls of arterioles, under the effect of
nervous or endocrine stimulation. It
reduces blood flow in arterioles.
Vasodilation: It is the increase of diameter
of a blood vessel due to relaxation of smooth
circular muscles in arterioles. It increases
blood flow in arterioles.
Q8. What is the rate of blood flow in
different types of blood vessels?
Ans. Rate of Blood Flow
The velocity of blood flow is different in
different vessels. It is highest in aorta (450-
500 mm/sec) and tends to fall along the
network of arteries, arterioles and becomes
lowest in capillaries (01 mm/sec). It rises
again in venules, veins and vena cavae (250-
300 mm/sec). These changes in the velocity
of blood result from changes in the total
cross section of the vessel system.

--- Page 3 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q9. State the role of baroreceptors and
volume receptors in regulating the low
blood pressure.
Ans. Regulation of Blood pressure
Role of baroreceptors: Pressure receptors,
known as baroreceptors are present in
carotid arteries (arteries that supply blood to
the head region and brain) and aortic arch
(portion of aorta that bends between the
ascending and descending aorta).
When blood pressure falls, baroreceptors
activate sensory neurons that send
information to brain. The control centre in
brain reacts by increasing the rate and force
of contraction of heart and by causing
vasoconstriction in arterioles. Both these
changes restore blood pressure to normal.
Role of volume receptors: Certain
hormones regulate the volume of blood by
effecting the reabsorption of water and salt in
kidneys. When there is a decrease in blood
volume and blood pressure, special receptors
present in brain create thirst. They also
stimulate posterior pituitary gland to secrete
antidiuretic hormone (ADH).
Q10. Differentiate between thrombus and embolus.
Thrombus
Thrombus is a solid mass or plug of blood
constituents (clot) platelets, fibrin fibres in
a blood vessel. This mass may block
(wholly or only in part) the vessel.
Causes: Thrombus formation may be due
to; (i) irritation or infection of lining of
blood vessels, (ii) reduced rate of blood
flow, due to long periods of inactivity, or
(iii) pneumonia, tuberculosis, emphysema
etc.
Embolus
The dislodged thrombus which has entered
the blood circulation is called embolus.
Embolus may be carried to some other
locations in the circulatory system which
may get stuck in smaller blood vessels and
cease blood supply leading to death of the
affected tissues.

SLO BASED SHORT QUESTION ANSWERS
Structure and Functioning of Heart
Q11. Name the transport systems of
humans describe the composition of blood
circulatory system of humans.
Ans. Humans have two systems for the
transport of different materials in different
parts of body i.e., blood circulatory system
and lymphatic system.
• The closed blood circulatory system of
humans consists of blood, heart, and blood
vessels (arteries, capillaries and veins).
★Q12. Why heart is felt on the left side of
chest? Describe its relation with lungs.
Ans. The heart is usually felt to be on the
left side because the left side of heart is
stronger and larger, since it pumps blood to
all body parts.
Relation with lungs: Because the heart is
between the lungs, the left lung is smaller
than the right lung and has a cardiac notch
in its border to accommodate the heart
Q13. Describe the position and location
of heart.
Ans. It is situated in the middle of chest
cavity (between the lungs). Its back surface
is near vertebral column while its front
surface is behind sternum and rib cartilages.
Q14. What is pericardium? Describe its
layers with their roles.
Ans. Heart is enclosed in a sac called
pericardium. Pericardium separates heart
from surrounding organs. It is composed of
the two layers, pericardial cavity and
pericardial fluid.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 4 ---
1. Outer layer of pericardium is called
fibrous pericardium. It is made of strong
connective tissue.
• It protects heart against external pressure
and shocks.
• It also prevents excessive dilation of heart.
2. Inner layer of pericardium is called
serous pericardium. It is a sac, made of
two layers i.e.,
a) Outer parietal pericardium - present
beneath fibrous pericardium.
b) Inner visceral pericardium (also called
epicardium) - closely attached to the
underlying heart.
Pericardial cavity: The space between
parietal and visceral pericardium is called
pericardial cavity.
• It contains up to 50 mL pericardial fluid.
It lubricates heart and protects it from
infections.
Q15. Describe the structure of heart
wall.
Ans. The heart wall is composed of three
layers.
Outer layer: The wall of heart is composed
of three layers. The inner layer of
pericardium i.e., epicardium makes the outer
lining of heart wall.
Middle layer: Beneath epicardium, there is
the thickest layer of heart wall i.e.,
myocardium. Myocardium is made of
cardiac muscles.
Inner layer: Endocardium is present beneath
myocardium. It is a single layer of epithelial
cells and make the inner linings of heart
chambers.

Parietal Visceral
pericardium pericardium
Myocardium
Endocardium
Pericardial
fluid

Q16. How many chambers are present in
heart? State chambers and septa of heart.
Ans. Chambers of heart
There are four chambers of heart i.e., two
upper thin-walled atria and two lower thick-
walled ventricles. Atria receive blood from
body and pass it to ventricles, which
distribute blood to body.
Septa of heart
• Atrioventricular septum: Atria and
ventricles are separated by
atrioventricular septum.
• Interatrial septum: The left and right
atria are separated from each other by an
interatrial septum.
• Interventricular septum: The left and
right ventricles are separated from each
other by an interventricular septum. It
is much thicker than the interatrial
septum.
Q17. Human heart functions as a double
pump. Justify?
Ans. Human heart functions as a double
pump because its right side (Right atrium
and Right ventricle) carries deoxygenated
blood, and its left side (left atrium and left
ventricle) carries oxygenated blood. It carries
out pulmonary circulation (supply of blood
to lungs) and systemic circulation (supply of
blood to all organs of body except lungs).
Complete separation of deoxygenated (right
side) and oxygenated (left side) blood is
maintained in heart.
Q18. Trace the circulation of blood
between heart, lungs and body.
Ans. Circulation of deoxygenated blood
The right atrium receives deoxygenated
blood from body via two veins i.e., superior
vena cava and inferior vena cava. Right
atrium passes this blood to right ventricle via
tricuspid valve. When right ventricle
contracts, deoxygenated blood is passed to

--- Page 5 ---
pulmonary trunk via semilunar pulmonary
valve. The pulmonary trunk divides into left
and right pulmonary arteries which carry this
blood to lungs.
Circulation of oxygenated blood
The oxygenated blood from lungs is brought
to left atrium by four pulmonary veins. Left
atrium passes this blood to left ventricle via
bicuspid (or mitral) valve. When left
ventricle contracts, oxygenated blood is
passed to aorta via semilunar aortic valve.
Aorta carries this blood to all parts of body
(except lungs).
Q19. Define heartbeat.
Ans. Definition: “The rhythmic contractions
and relaxations of the heart muscles, produce
sound is called heartbeat”.
Heart works in continuous cycles. Its
chambers relax and are passively filled with
blood from large veins. Then, its chambers
contract and propel the blood throughout
body.

Q20. Why left ventricle is thicker than
right one?
Ans. The wall of left ventricle is thicker
(about 3 times) than that of the right ventricle
because it has to push/pump the blood to all
over body, with greater force.
Q21. Differentiate between normal and
abnormal heart sounds. How abnormal
sounds can be caused?
Ans. Normal heart sounds: There are two
normal heart sounds heard by stethoscope.
Lubb sound: When both ventricles contract
simultaneously to pump the blood to
pulmonary arteries and aorta, the tricuspid
and bicuspid valves close and “lubb” sound
is made.
Dubb sound: When ventricular systole ends
and both ventricles relax simultaneously, the
pulmonary and aortic semilunar valves close
and “dubb” sound is made. Lubb-Dubb can
be heared with the help of a stethoscope.
Abnormal heart sounds: If the valves are
not closing fully, or if they open narrowly,
turbulence is created within the heart. This
turbulence can be heard; it is called murmur.
A murmur sounds like a hiss.

Q22. Compare the morphology and physiology of SA-node and AV-node.
SA-node
• The sinoatrial node consists of a small
cluster of cardiac muscle cells.
• It is embedded in the upper wall of right
atrium.
• Heartbeat starts when SA-node sends
electrical impulses to the walls of atria.
• It causes both atria to contract
simultaneously.

AV-node
• AV-node is made of small cluster of
cardiac muscle cells.
• It is located at the lower portion of
interatrial septum.
• It sends impulses to ventricles through
AV-bundle.

Q23. How nerve impulses are
propagated from AV-node to ventricles?
Ans. From AV node, the impulses reach an
atrioventricular bundle or bundle of His. It
is a network of fibres present in
interventricular septum. AV bundle divides
into left and right branches, which end at the
Purkinje fibres in the walls of the ventricles.
Stimulation of these fibres causes the
ventricles to contract almost simultaneously

--- Page 6 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q24. What are consequences of blocked
or weak impulse in heart? How it can be
cured?
Ans. If there is some blockage in the flow
of the electrical impulses, or if the impulses
initiated by SA node are weak; it may delay
the rhythmicity of heartbeat or stop it, which
can lead to heart attack or cardiac failure, if
not cured.
Cure of weak impulses: In such patients of
weak SA node, artificial pacemaker is used.
It is a battery- operated device that is
surgically transplanted near the AV node. It
emits electrical signals that trigger normal
heartbeats.
Q25. Describe how heart rate is
controlled in various physical conditions?

Ans. The heart of an average adult beats
about 70 times per minute. It pumps the
entire blood volume (about 5 litres) every
minute. The normal speed of heartbeat is
made and maintained by pacemaker and AV
node. Brain also exerts some influence on
heart rate.
During fever: During fever and exercise, the
control centre in brain sends nerve signals to
both the pacemaker and the AV node, making
them to increase the heart rate. It is to cope
with the situation.
During rest: In contrast, when we are asleep
or at rest, the brain's control centre slows
down the activity of pacemaker and AV node.
Q26. Draw the sketch of normal ECG
wave form showing its component.
Q27. Compare PR segment with ST segment.
PR segment
• The flat line between the end of P-wave
and start of QRS complex is called PR
segment.
• It shows the completion of atrial
depolarization.
• It is usually 0.12 to 0.20 seconds.
• A prolonged PR indicates a first-degree
heart block.
ST segment
• It is a flat line between end of QRS
complex and start of T-wave.
• It shows the completion of
depolarization of ventricles.
• This segment ordinarily lasts about 0.08
second.
• It can be depressed in ischemia (decreased
flow of blood and oxygen to heart
muscles) and elevated in myocardial
infarction.

Q28. Brief about following components of ECG
a) P-wave b) T-wave
P-wave
• It shows beginning of atrial
depolarization, initiated by SA node. It
causes atrial contraction.
• Irregular or absent P waves may
indicate arrhythmia (lack of rhythmicity).
T-wave
• It represents the beginning of
repolarization of ventricles.
• T-wave abnormalities may indicate
electrolyte disturbance. The hyper-acute
T-wave shows the earliest findings of
acute myocardial infarction.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 7 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q29. Compare QRS complex and QT interval of a normal ECG.
QRS                                                                    QT interval
• It shows the beginning of • The QT interval is from the beginning of
depolarization of ventricles. Atrial re- the QRS complex to the end of the T
polarization also occurs during this wave. A normal QT interval is usually
phase.                                                               about 0.40 seconds.
• Abnormalities in the QRS complex • Abnormalities of QT-interval can
may indicate bundle branch block, indicate dangerous heart rhythms and
ventricular tachycardia (faster rate of sudden cardiac death.
contraction), or other ventricular
abnormalities.
★Q30. What are blue babies? Describe its development, which is a temporary
reasons.                                                               opening in the embryonic heart between
Ans. It is a development defect in the right and left atria. Normally, it is closed
cardiovascular system some newborns, in during development.
which the infants skin appears blue, these are • Cyanosis may also happen due to failure
called blue babies. The blueness of skin is of ductus arteriosus to fully constrict,
called cyanosis, which is due to poorly during development. Ductus arteriosus is
oxygenated (mix blood) to the body a temporary channel between the
(especially skin).                                               embryonic pulmonary artery and aorta.
Causes                                                               Normally, it constricts during
• Cyanosis results due to the failure of development.
interatrial foramen to close, during

Blood Vessels
Q31. Differentiate between arteries and veins.
Arteries                                                               Veins
• Arteries are the blood vessels which • These blood vessels carry blood from
carry blood away from heart to different parts of the body towards heart.
different parts of body.                                     • All veins carry deoxygenated blood,
• All arteries carry oxygenated blood, except pulmonary veins.
except pulmonary arteries.                                • The wall of veins has same three layers as
• The walls of arteries are made up of are present in arteries.
three layers.                                                      • Tunica externa (adventitia): It is the
• Tunica externa or adventitia: It is the outer layer of veins, made of connective
outer layer of arteries made of and elastic tissue.
connective and elastic tissue.                            • Tunica media: It is the middle layer of
• Tunica media: It is the middle layer of veins, relatively thin and only slightly
arteries made of thick muscular tissue muscular, with few elastic fibres.
and elastic fibres.                                             • Tunica intima: It is the inner layer of
• Tunica intima: It is the inner layer of veins, made of thin layer of endothelial
arteries made of thin layer of cells.
endothelial cells.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 8 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q32. How capillaries are formed?
Describe their composition and role.
Ans. Formation: These vessels are formed
by the division of arterioles. Capillaries join
to form venules. Capillaries penetrate all
tissues and have approach to the cellular
level.
Composition: The walls of capillaries are
made of a single layer of endothelial cells.
The internal diameter of a capillary is about 8
micrometers.
Role: Capillaries are the sites where
materials are exchanged between blood and
body tissues by diffusion or active transport.
★Q33. What do you know about the length
of capillaries?
Ans. No cell of the body is more than 100
micrometres away from a capillary.
Capillaries are so narrow that RBCs must
pass through them in single line. It is
estimated that the total length of capillaries in
an adult human is over 80,600 kilometres,
enough to encircle the global twice!
Q34. Define interstitial fluid. Describe its
composition.
Ans. Definition: The pressure within
capillaries causes a continuous leakage of
fluid from the blood plasma into tissues. This
fluid, known as interstitial fluid.
Composition: Interstitial fluid consists of
water with dissolved nutrients, hormones,
gases, wastes and small proteins.
Large proteins, RBCs and platelets remain
within capillaries. But some WBCs can
squeeze out through the intercellular spaces
of capillary wall.
Q35. Describe the role of pre-capillary
sphincters in maintaining blood flow in
capillaries.
• Some capillaries are connected to arterioles
and venules through loops of other
capillaries. The entry of each loop is
guarded by a ring of muscles called a pre-
capillary sphincter These sphincters
regulate the amount of blood flowing
through capillaries.
• The amount of blood flowing in capillaries
is controlled by constricting or dilating the
capillaries. Nervous stimulation can
constrict capillaries and certain chemicals
such as histamine can dilate them.

                                                                    Arteriole
                                                                    Pre-capillary
                                                                    sphincter
                                                                    Capillaries
                                                                    Venule

Q36. Differentiate between pulmonary circulation from system circulation.
| Pulmonary Circulation | System Circulation |
| :--- | :--- |
| • Circulation of blood from heart to the lungs and from lungs back to the heart is called pulmonary circulation. | • Circulation of blood from heart to body (except lungs) and from body back to heart is called systemic circulation. |
| • Pulmonary circulation supplies deoxygenated blood to lungs and returns oxygenated blood to heart. | • The systemic circulation supplies oxygenated blood to all the cells, tissues, and organs of the body (except lungs) and returns deoxygenated blood to heart. |

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 9 ---
Q37. Describe the blood supply of heart.
Ans. Arterial blood supply: The heart walls are supplied with blood through a small portion of the systemic circulation. Two coronary arteries i.e., the right and left coronary arteries, arise from the aorta, near its origin. These arteries divide into many smaller arteries, arterioles and then into capillaries.
Venous blood supply: After supplying oxygenated blood to heart muscles, the capillaries unite to form venules which make many coronary veins. The coronary veins join to form a coronary sinus, which opens in right atrium. Small coronary veins drain directly into right atrium.
Q38. Define hepatic-portal circulation. For what purpose it is build?
Ans. A portal system is a circulation in which veins end in capillaries. In hepatic portal system, a large hepatic portal vein collects blood from spleen and alimentary canal and takes it to the liver through hepatic portal vein. The blood from liver is taken to heart through hepatic veins. Hepatic portal system extends from thelower portion of oesophagus to the upper part of anal canal.
Purpose: The blood that comes from alimentary canal to liver contains substances that are absorbed from small intestine. These substances pass through liver before going to heart. Liver removes harmful substances from blood and absorbs nutrients for storage before sending this blood to heart.
Q39. Describe the renal circulation of blood.
Ans. Arterial circulation: The kidneys (renals) are supplied by left and right renal arteries. Right and left renal arteries carry oxygenated blood to the right and left kidneys. Inside the kidney, each renal artery divides repeatedly to make smaller arteries. The smaller arteries branch into several afferent arterioles, which supply blood to nephrons (units of kidney).
• Each afferent arteriole divides to make the capillaries of glomeruli.
Venous circulation: The capillaries of glomeruli unite to make efferent arteriole, which divides to make two sets of capillaries i.e., (i) peri-tubular capillaries (around nephron tubule in cortical portion of kidney), and (ii) vasa recta (around nephron tubule in the medulla of kidney). These capillaries unite to form venules that converge and make smaller veins. The smaller veins unit to form a renal vein.
Q40. Sketch and label nephron.
[Image of nephron diagram with labels: Peri-tubular capillaries, Efferent arteriole, Glomerulus, Afferent arteriole, Smaller arteries, Vasa recta, Venule, Smaller vein]

Blood Pressure
Q41. Define blood pressure. Describe systolic and diastolic pressure. How it is measured?
Ans. Blood pressure is the measure of force exerted by blood against the inner walls of blood vessels arteries. This force keeps blood flowing from heart to the entire capillary network in body.
Systolic pressure: When ventricles contract (ventricular systole), heart forces blood into pulmonary arteries and aorta. As a result, the pressure in these arteries rises sharply. The

--- Page 10 ---
maximum pressure during ventricular systole
is called systolic pressure. Systolic pressure
in a normal young adult is 120 mm Hg.
Diastolic pressure: When ventricles relax
(diastole), the arterial pressure drops. The
lowest pressure that remains in arteries
before the next ventricular contraction is
called diastolic pressure. Diastolic pressure
in a normal young adult is 80 mm Hg.
• It is measured using sphygmomanometer
and stethoscope.
Q42. Describe the long-term regulation
of blood pressure. / Describe the hormonal
mechanism of blood pressure regulation.

Ans. The long-term regulation of blood
pressure is done through hormones. Certain
hormones regulate the volume of blood by
effecting the reabsorption of water and salt in
kidneys.
Role of ADH in low blood pressure
When there is a decrease in blood volume and
blood pressure, special receptors present in
brain create thirst. They also stimulate
posterior pituitary gland to secrete
antidiuretic hormone (ADH). ADH
stimulates kidneys to retain more water in
blood, excreting less in urine. It restores the
blood volume and ultimately blood pressure.
ADH also constricts arterioles, which raises
arterial blood pressure.

Q43. Compare and contrast the roles of ADH and ANH in maintaining blood pressure.
ADH
• ADH (Anti Diuretic Hormones) usually
works to raise/increase blood pressure
during low blood pressure.
• ADH stimulates kidneys to retain more
water in blood, excreting less in urine. It
restores the blood volume and ultimately
blood pressure. ADH also constricts
arterioles, which raises arterial blood
pressure.

ANH
• ANH (Arterial Natriuretic Hormones)
works to decrease blood pressure during
high blood pressure.
• The walls of right atrium contain endocrine
cells that secrete atrial natriuretic
hormone (ANH). When there is stretching
of the atrium by an increased blood volume,
the right atrium secretes ANH. It speeds up
the excretion of salts and water through
urine, which lowers the blood volume and
pressure.

Cardiovascular Disorders
Q44. Differentiate between atherosclerosis and arteriosclerosis.
Atherosclerosis
Atherosclerosis means deposition within
arteries. Various materials may accumulate
in arteries e.g., fatty materials, abnormal
amounts of smooth muscle cells,
cholesterol, fibrin and cellular debris of
various kinds.
Atherosclerosis can lead to heart attacks,
because it causes the narrowing of arteries

Arteriosclerosis
Arteriosclerosis means hardening of
arterial walls. It occurs when calcium is
deposited in arterial walls. The blood flow
through these arteries is restricted and
arteries cannot expand normally. This forces
the heart to work harder. Severe
atherosclerosis usually leads to
arteriosclerosis.

--- Page 11 ---
and increases the risk of the formation of
thrombus.

It is coexisting Atheroma and
arteriosclerosis Atheroma is deposition of
hard yellow plaque of lipoid material in the
inner most layer of arteries which may be
due to high level of cholesterol in the blood.
Arteriosclerosis is degenerative arterial
change associated with advancing age,
primarily a thickening of middle layer of
arteries.

Q45. Define thromboembolism and
thrombosis. How it is formed?
Ans. Thromboembolism: Formation of
thrombus in a blood vessel and then its
carriage to any other location is called
thromboembolism.
Thrombosis: Thrombosis is the formation of
thrombus. Thrombus is a solid mass or plug
of blood constituents (clot) in a blood vessel.
This mass may block (wholly or only in part)
the vessel.
Causes: Thrombus formation may be due to;
(i) irritation or infection of lining of blood
vessels, (ii) reduced rate of blood flow, due
to long periods of inactivity, (iii) pneumonia,
tuberculosis, emphysema etc.
Q46. What happens if thrombosis occurs
in coronary arteries and brain vessels?

Ans. Thrombosis blocks the blood flow to
organs. A thrombosis in coronary arteries
causes heart attack which can be life
threatening. Similarly, a thrombus in the
vessels of brain causes stroke (which causes
paralysis of the muscles). A thrombus may be
dislodged and carried to some other locations
in the circulatory system. Such a thrombus is
called embolus.
Q47. What is angina pectoris? What
does it indicate?
• The pain felt in the regions of chest,
shoulders, arms and jaws due to hypoxia
(low oxygen levels) to myocardium is
called angina pectoris.
• It usually occurs due to blockage of
coronary arteries is usually due to gradual
build-up of lipids (especially cholesterol)
in the inner wall of coronary artery.
• Angina indicates that oxygen demands are
greater than its delivery and a heart attack
may occur in future.
Q48. Define myocardial infarction. Is it
possible to recover from heart attack?

Ans. Death of heart muscles due to
insufficient supply of oxygen and nutrients;
leading to death of cardiomyocytes is known
as myocardial infarction also known as
heart attack.
Causes: The major cause of heart attack is
the blockage of coronary arteries.
Coronary arteries supply oxygen and
nutrients to cardiac muscles. If blood flow is
blocked in coronary arteries, it results in
insufficient supply of blood to one or more
parts of cardiac muscle.
Recovery from a heart attack is possible if
the damaged portion of heart is small enough
that the other blood vessels in heart can
enlarge their capacity and resupply the
damaged tissues.
Q49. Which procedure is used to
examine blood vessels and chambers of
heart? How it is performed?
Ans. Coronary angiography is the most
appropriate method to examine blood vessels

--- Page 12 ---
and heart chambers. In this method X-rays
are used to examine the blood vessels and
heart chambers. In order to create the X-ray
pictures, a physician guides a small tube-like
device called catheter through the large
arteries of body. When the tip of catheter
reaches the opening of coronary arteries, a
special fluid (called a contrast medium or
dye) is injected in catheter This fluid is
visible in X-ray machine. Pictures
(angiograms) of fluid in coronary artery are
obtained.
Q50. What is open-heart surgery? How
coronary bypass surgery is performed?

• The open heart surgery is done when
heart is still beating it includes bypass
surgery valvular replacement etc.
Coronary Bypass Surgery
• It is one of the most common and effective
procedures to compensate the blockage of
blood to cardiac muscles. In this surgery,
surgeon takes a healthy blood vessel from
leg, arm, chest or abdomen of the patient.
He attaches the ends of blood vessel above
and below the blocked coronary artery. So,
blood is bypassed around the damaged or
blocked area.
• Coronary bypass surgery doesn't cure the
underlying disease process i.e.,
atherosclerosis or coronary artery disease.
Lifestyle changes especially smoking
cessation are crucial to reduce the chance
of future blockages and heart attacks, even
after successful bypass surgery.
Q51. Describe the procedure of
performing angioplasty and stenting.

Ans. Angioplasty: Angioplasty is a
procedure that opens a blocked or narrowed
artery. During an angioplasty, a small wire
called a catheter, under X-ray guidance, is
passed through the narrowed coronary artery.

A small sausage- shaped balloon is then
advanced over the wire into the narrowed
section of artery. The balloon is then inflated
to dilate the narrowed section of the artery.
Once the artery is dilated, a small amount
of dye is injected to confirm the successful
dilatation.
Stenting: Stenting may also be done during
angioplasty. A stent is an expandable stainless
steel mesh tube, mounted on a balloon
catheter. When the stent/balloon is positioned
within the narrowed artery, the balloon is
inflated. The inflated balloon expands the
stent and the artery. The balloon is removed
and the stent remains in place. The stent
supports the artery walls and keep the artery
open and dilated.
Q52. Define hypertension. What are its
causes?
Ans. A chronic (long lasting) elevation
in blood pressure is called hypertension.
It occurs when blood pressure consistently
remains above 140/90 mm Hg.
Causes
• Any abnormality in nervous or hormonal
mechanisms of blood pressure regulation
may cause hypertension.
• Stress, obesity, high salt intake, smoking,
there may also be hereditary reasons of
hypertension.
Q53. Illustrate the damages caused by
hypertension. / What are the complications
of hypertension?
Ans. Whenever blood pressure is
chronically elevated, there is an increased
chance of the rupture of blood vessels.
Effect on brain: When this occurs in
brain, it is called brain haemorrhage. It
damages the delicate structure of brain.
Effect on cardiac muscles: Hypertension
also weakens cardiac muscles. If
hypertension is prolonged, heart is unable
to pump effectively and blood flow cannot

--- Page 13 ---
be maintained to meet needs of tissues. In
such conditions, blood may be retained in
heart and lungs. It is called congestive
heart failure.
Effect on kidneys: Hypertension can also
damage the nephrons of kidneys. It leads to
further retention of salts and water in blood
and therefore further hypertension.

Lymphatic system of human
Q54. Write the definition and
composition of lymphatic system of human.

Ans. In human, in addition to the blood
circulatory system, there is another system
responsible for the transport of materials. It
also returns the materials from tissues to
blood. This system is called lymphatic
system.
Composition: It consists of lymph vessels,
lymphoid masses, lymph nodes and lymph-
the fluid which flows in the system.
Q55. Define lacteals. Write their role.

Ans. The branches of lymph capillaries in
villi, are called lacteals. Fatty acids and
glycerol are absorbed into the epithelial cells
of villi where they form triglycerides. The
triglycerides are coated with proteins to form
chylomicrons, which enter the lacteals of
villi.
Q56. Write two important functions of
lymphatic system.
Ans. Functions of lymphatic system
• Lymphatic system returns the excess fluid
and dissolved proteins and other
substances to blood. In an average person,
about three litres more fluid leaves blood
capillaries daily. But it is absorbed by
lymphatic capillaries and returned to
bloodstream, before the blood enters heart.

• Lymphatic system also helps to defend
body against foreign invaders.
• Lymph nodes filter lymph. They have
lymphocytes and macrophages that destroy
bacteria and viruses present in lymph.
★Q57. Give the reason of swelling of
lymph nodes.
Ans. The painful swelling of lymph nodes
in certain diseases (e.g., mumps) is largely a
result of the accumulation of dead
lymphocytes and macrophages.
Q58. Define lymph nodes. Where the are
present in human body?
Ans. At certain spots, the lymph vessels
have masses of connective tissue where
lymphocytes are present. These are lymph
nodes. Several afferent lymph vessels enter a
lymph node and the lymph is drained by a
single efferent lymph vessel. Lymph nodes
are present in the neck region, axilla and
groin areas of man.
Q59. Sketch and label a lymph node?

Drainage of lymph
Lymph
vessel
Entry and
drainage
of blood
Lymphocytes
and
Macrophages
Entry of lymph
Lymphatics

Q60. Name some lymphoid masses.
What does they produce?
Ans. The larger lymphoid masses are
spleen, thymus, tonsils and adenoids. These
produce lymphocytes and play role in
immunity.

--- Page 14 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

LONG QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)
Q1. Describe the structure of the walls
of heart and rationalize the thickness of
the wall of each chamber.
Ans. See Q1. of theory.
Q2. Describe the flow of blood through
heart as regulated by the valves.
Ans. See Q2. of theory.
Q3. Explain how a heartbeat is initiated
and controlled.
Ans. See Q4. of theory.
Q4. Describe the detailed structure of
arteries, veins and capillaries.
Ans. See Q6. of theory.
Q5. Describe the role of precapillary
sphincters in regulating the flow of blood
through capillaries.
Ans. See Q7. of theory.
Q6. Write the components of
pulmonary circulation.
Ans. See Q9. of theory.
Q7. What are the main components of
coronary, hepatic-portal and renal
circulation?
Ans. See Q10. of theory.
Q8. Define blood pressure and explain
systolic and diastolic pressure.
Ans. See Q11. of theory.
Q9. Identify the factors causing
atherosclerosis and arteriosclerosis.
Ans. See Q13. of theory.
Q10. Write notes on Angina pectoris
heart attack, and heart failure.
Ans. See Q15. of theory.
Q11. Outline the main principles of
coronary bypass and angioplasty.
Ans. See Q16. of theory.
Q12. Define hypertension and describe
the factors that regulate blood pressure
and can lead to hypertension and
hypotension.
Ans. See Q17. of theory.
Q13. List the changes in life styles than
can protect man from hypertension and
cardiac problems.
Ans. See Q15. of theory.
Q14. Describe the structure and role of
lymph capillaries, lymph vessels and
lymph ducts.
Ans. See Q18. of theory.

INQUISITIVE QUESTIONS
Q1. Why is the pressure in the pulmonary circulation lower than in the
systemic circulation?
Ans. The pressure in the pulmonary circulation is significantly lower than is systemic
circulation due to differences in vascular resistance, vascular structure and functional
requirements. The pulmonary circulation is a low pressure, high flow system designed for
efficient gaseous exchange, while systemic circulation is a high pressure system needed to
supply all organs against resistance.
Q2. Why is it so important for the human heart to develop early and begin
functioning within the developing embryo?
Ans. The early development and functioning of the human heart in the embryonic life are
crucial for several reasons related to oxygen supply, nutrients delivery, removal of
metabolic waste and for the survival of embryo. Embryo grows too fast, so diffusion alone

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 15 ---
becomes insufficient to meet the requirements of rapid growth. As the metabolic rate of
embryo is very high every. To form new organs, oxygen, nutrients supply and waste removal,
without heart seems to be very difficult.
Q3. Justify how vasoconstriction or vasodilation is reflective of emotions.

Ans. Vasoconstriction and vasodilation are physiological responses that reflects emotional
states due to relationship with autonomic nervous system and endocrine systems.
• For example, during fear stress & emergency situations sympathetic nervous system
activates leading to vasoconstriction in gastro intestinal tract (GIT) and skin while
vasodilation occurs improving blood flow to muscles and brain to prepare body for rapid
actions (e.g., running or fighting). These vascular charges not only prepare the body for
action or recovery, but also visibly manifest emotions (e.g., blushing, pallor) making them
a physiological mirror of our inner feelings.
Q4. Justify in what way the blood circulatory system is dependent on the
lymphatic system.
Ans. The blood circulatory system depends on the lymphatic system as about 3 litres more
fluid leaves blood capillaries daily then is reabsorbed in an average adult, lymphatic system
returns this excess fluid having dissolved proteins and other substances, back to blood
circulatory system to maintain its blood volume, moreover it also destroys the pathogens
which entered the tissues thus, helps defend the body against foreign invaders.
Q5. Interpret why the swelling of the lymph nodes is a cause of concern.

Ans. The swelling of lymph nodes also called lymph adenopathy can be caused by various
factors, like viral infections (mumps), bacterial infections (cervical lymph adenopathy) or
due to cancer. As the lymph nodes filter lymph bacteria or viruses present in lymph are
destroyed by macrophages and lymphocytes of lymph nodes which often result in swelling,
so that's why swelling of lymph nodes is a cause of concern it shall not be left unattended.
Q6. Trace the path of lymph until it is returned to the blood.
Ans. Lymph → lymph capillaries → lymphatic vessels → larger lymph ducts → main
lymph duct (right lymphatic duct and thoracic duct) → subclavian veins (right and left).

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch11 Short Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [10/36]: 11th Bio New Ch12 Long Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 12: Human Skeletal and Muscular Systems

Long Questions

DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONS

BONES AND CARTILAGE

Q1. Explain the structure of bone. / Describe the structural and chemical
composition of bone.
Ans. Skeleton
Bones, cartilage and other connective tissues make an internal framework called skeleton
that provides structural support, protects vital organs, and produces movement and
locomotion.
Structure of Bone
Bones are made of connective tissue reinforced with calcium and specialized bone cells.
Following are the major components of a bone;
1. The bone's surface is covered by a tough membrane called periosteum.
★The broad ends of a bone are called epiphysis while the middle part along the length of
bone is called diaphysis or shaft.
2. Compact Bone / Haversian System
The thick layer under periosteum is made of hard material and is called compact bone. It
makes up the majority of the bone tissue. The basic structural units of compact bone are
called Haversian systems. A Haversian system is made of three parts;
(i) Lamellae: These are concentric layers of mineralized extracellular matrix that contains
collagen fibres and small, needle-shaped crystals of calcium phosphate. The crystals are
brittle but rigid, giving bone great strength. Collagen, is flexible but weak. As a result, bone
is both strong and flexible.
(ii) Lacunae and Osteocytes: The lamellae are separated by small spaces called lacunae.
Osteocytes, which are mature bone cells, are located in the lacunae. Osteocytes are
connected to each other and to the Haversian canal by small channels called canaliculi.
(iii) Haversian canal: The concentric layers of lamellae surround a central canal called the
Haversian canal. It contains blood vessels, nerves, and lymphatic vessels.
Small Channels: There are small channels that run perpendicular to the Haversian canals
and connect them with each other and with the periosteum.
3. Spongy Bone: Beneath the compact bone there is spongy bone. It has a latticework
structure consisting of bony spikes that make it light and strong.
★ Note: All questions and paragraphs marked with a star ★ are explanations of the Box
Information provided in the textbook.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Haversian system Haversian canal
Lamella Canaliculi
Epiphysis
Extracellular
matrix
Diaphysis
Bone
marrow Spongy
bone Compact
bone
Lacuna Osteocyte
Epiphysis Periosteum
Fig: Structure of bone

4. Bone Marrow
Many bones also contain a soft tissue called bone marrow, which can be either red or yellow.
(i) Red bone marrow is found in spongy bone, the ends of long bones, ribs, vertebrae, the
sternum, and the pelvis. It produces blood cells.
(ii) Yellow bone marrow fills the shafts of long bones. It consists mostly of fat cells and
serves as an energy reserve. It can also be converted to red bone marrow and produce
blood cells when severe blood loss occurs.
★Living tissues: Despite their number and size bones make up less than 20% of the body's
mass. Bones are not dry, rigid structures, as they appear. They are moist, living tissues.
5. Types of Bone Cells
There are three types of cells i.e., osteoblasts, osteocytes, and osteoclasts involved in the
development, growth and remodelling of bones.
• Osteoblasts are bone forming cells that synthesize and secrete unmineralized ground
substance. Once the osteoblasts are surrounded by matrix, they become the osteocytes.
• Osteocytes are mature bone cells which maintain healthy bone tissue by secreting
enzymes and bone mineral content. They also regulate the calcium release from bone
tissue to blood.
• Osteoclasts develop from macrophages and are involved in bone resorption, i.e., they
break down bone and release calcium and phosphate in blood. The work of osteoclasts
is important to the growth and repair of bone.
Q2. Illustrate the process of bone formation or osteogenesis. / OR
Define osteogenesis. Describe the primary pathways of osteogenesis. / Explain
the process of bone development.
Ans. Bone Development
Definition: "The process of bone formation is called osteogenesis."
It begins during embryonic development and continues throughout life, playing a vital role
in growth, maintenance, and repair of bones.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 3 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Types of Bone Cells
There are three types of cells i.e., osteoblasts, osteocytes, and osteoclasts involved in the
development, growth and remodelling of bones.
• Osteoblasts are bone forming cells that synthesize and secrete unmineralized ground
substance. Once the osteoblasts are surrounded by matrix, they become the osteocytes.
• Osteocytes are mature bone cells which maintain healthy bone tissue by secreting
enzymes and bone mineral content. They also regulate the calcium release from bone
tissue to blood.
• Osteoclasts develop from macrophages and are involved in bone resorption, i.e., they
break down bone and release calcium and phosphate in blood. The work of osteoclasts
is important to the growth and repair of bone.
★ Even after bones have fully formed osteogenesis continues in the form of bone
remodelling. This ongoing process involves the breakdown of old bone by osteoclasts and
the formation of new bone by osteoblasts.

[Image of bone cells]
Osteogenic cell          Osteoblasts              Osteocyte              Osteoclast
(stem cell)           (form bone matrix)      (mature bone cell)       (resorbs bone)

                                Fig: Types of bone cells

Pathways: There are two Primary pathways of osteogenesis.
1. Endochondral Ossification/Transition of Cartilage into bone: The formation of long
bones e.g., femur and humerus, involves the transition of cartilage into bone. In this
process, the center of cartilage begins to harden (calcify), and the chondrocytes (cartilage
cells) in this area die, leaving behind cavities.
Ossification: The step by which cartilage is replaced by bone by the deposition of minerals
is called ossification. Blood vessels penetrate these cavities and introduce osteoblasts and
osteoclasts. Osteoblasts (bone-forming cells) start building bone tissue, replacing the
cartilage with new bone. Osteoclasts (bone-resorbing cells) break down the calcified
cartilage, making room for more bone tissue to form. As the bone matures, some osteoblasts
become trapped within the bone tissue and transform into osteocytes (mature bone cells),
which help maintain the bone structure. This process continues until all cartilage is changed
to a bone except some cartilage that remains only at the articular (joint) surfaces of the
bones.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 4 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Articular
cartilage
Second site of
ossification
Blood
vessels
First site of
ossification
Cartilage

Fig: Development of bone from cartilage

2. Intramembranous ossification: The short bones develop directly into hard bone without
forming cartilage first e.g., some bones of the skull.
• In these cases, the osteocytes are initially scattered randomly throughout the embryonic
connective tissue but soon fuse into layers and become flat plates of bone.
Q3. Describe the structure of cartilage and its types.
Ans. Definition: Cartilage is a type of connective tissue, which is made up of
perichondrium, cartilage matrix and chondrocytes.
Structure of Cartilage
1. Perichondrium: A layer of connective tissue called perichondrium surrounds the
cartilage. It contains blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and nerves that supply the cartilage
tissue.
2. Cartilage matrix: Inside perichondrium is the cartilage matrix which is composed of
collagen, elastin, proteoglycans, and other fibres. It gives the tissue its strength, flexibility,
and resistance to compression. Unlike other connective tissues, there are no blood vessels
inside cartilage matrix. The cells of cartilage are supplied by diffusion. Because of this, it
heals very slowly.
3. Chondrocytes: The cartilage cells, called chondrocytes, are present within small spaces
called lacunae, which are embedded in cartilage matrix. Chondrocytes are responsible for
synthesizing and maintaining the matrix of cartilage.
Most of the cartilage of foetus is replaced by bone. However, some cartilage remains
throughout life and provides flexibility. For example, at the areas between bones, at the end
of nose, in the outer ear, and along the inside of the trachea.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 5 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Chondrocytes
in lacunae Matrix Collagen
fibres Perichondrium

Hyaline cartilage Fibrocartilage Elastic cartilage
Fig: Cartilage types

4. Types of Cartilage
• Cartilage can be classified into three types.
• Hyaline cartilage is the most common type and is found in the nose, trachea, and the
articulating surfaces of bones in joints.
• Fibrocartilage is found in areas of the body that experience high stress and tension,
such as the intervertebral discs and the pubic symphysis.
• Elastic cartilage is found in the external ear and epiglottis.
Q4. Describe the arrangement of bones of human axial skeleton.
Ans. Axial Skeleton
The axial skeleton forms the axis of the body. It is composed of 80 bones. Its bones
support and protect the organs of the head, neck, and chest. It consists of skull, ribs, spine,
and sternum.
Description
a. Skull
The skull bones are divided into cranial bones (8) and facial bones (14). It consists of total 22
bones and 6 middle ear ossicles.
Cranial Bones: Eight cranial bones form cranium (brain box).
• 2 paired bones are parietal and temporal.
• 4 unpaired bones are frontal, occipital, ethmoid and sphenoid.

Frontal
Sphenoid
Ethmoid
Nasal (2)
Lacrimal (2)
Maxilla (2)
Mandible (2)
Parietal (2)
Temporal (2)
Zygomatic (2) Occipital
Lateral view Figure: Human skull
Nasal (2)
Lacrimal (2)
Infior nasal
concha (2)
Maxilla (2)
Mandible
Palatine
(2)
Zygomatic
(2)
Vomer
Front view
(to mention the facial bones)

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 6 ---
Facial Bones: Fourteen facial bones are
attached to the cranium.
• 6 paired bones are lacrimal, zygomatic,
nasal, inferior nasal concha, maxilla and
palatine.
• 2 unpaired bones are mandible (jaw
bone) and vomer.
b. Middle ear: There are 6 bones (3 pairs)
in middle ears. These are called ossicles
and include malleus, incus and stapes
(Smallest human bone).
c. Neck bone: Hyoid bone is a small U-
shaped single bone which lies at the
base of skull below the tongue. It does
not articulate with any other bone of
head.
d. Vertebral column: It consists of 33
bones called vertebrae. The vertebrae
make five groups. However, in adults there are only 26 vertebrae after fusion.
(i) Cervical vertebrae (C1-C7): These are the seven vertebrae of the neck. The first
one is called atlas and the second one is called axis (it facilitates rotational
movement).
(ii) Thoracic vertebrae (T1-T12): These are the twelve rib-carrying vertebrae and are
found in chest region.
(iii) Lumbar vertebrae (L1-L5): These are the five vertebrae present in abdominal region.
(iv) Sacral vertebrae (S1-S5): These are the five fused vertebrae in the pelvic region
forming the sacrum. The sacrum articulates with the iliac bones of the hip to form the
back of the pelvis.
(v) Coccygeal vertebrae (Co1-Co4): These are the four fused vertebrae in the pelvic
region in adults also known as coccyx or (tail bone). Sacral and coccygeal vertebrae are
together called pelvic vertebrae.
e. Rib Cage & Chest bone: The rib cage consists of 24 bones (12 pairs) called ribs and a
sternum. The sternum (chest bone) is a long flat bone located in the central part of the
chest. The ribs articulate posteriorly with the thoracic vertebrae.
• True Ribs: On anterior side, 7 pairs of ribs attach directly with the sternum by means of
separate costal cartilages. These are called true ribs.
• False Ribs: The 8th, 9th and 10th pairs attach to the sternum by means of a common
costal cartilage and are called false ribs.

--- Page 7 ---
• Floating Ribs: The last 2 pairs of ribs
(11th and 12th) are known as floating ribs,
because they do not attach to the sternum.

Atlas
Axis
Cervical
Spinal
cord
Thoracic
True
ribs
Thoracic
vertebra
Sternum
Lumber
Intervertebral
disc
False
ribs
Common
Costal
cartilage
Sacral
Floating
ribs
Coccygeal
Fig: Rib cage
Fig: Vertebral Column

Bones
Number
Skull
22
Middle ear ossicles
06
Hyoid
01
Sternum
01
Ribs
24
Vertebral Column
26 (in adults)
Total
80

Q5. Describe the arrangement of bones of human Appendicular skeleton.

Ans. Appendicular skeleton includes the bones present in appendages (arms and legs). It is
composed of 126 bones. These are pectoral girdle, pelvic girdle, forelimbs and hindlimbs.
a. Pectoral girdle: It consists of 2 pairs i.e., a pair of clavicles (collar bones) and a pair of
scapulae (shoulder bones). One end of clavicle articulates with the sternum and other
end articulates with the scapula.
b. Forelimbs: Each forelimb (arm, wrist, hand, fingers) consists of the following 30 bones.

--- Page 8 ---
i. One humerus: It is a long bone, the end of
which has a spherical head, which fits into the
glenoid cavity of scapula forming shoulder joint
or glenohumeral joint.
ii. One ulna and one radius: These are long
bones. Ulna is on the inner side (little finger
side) of arm while radius is on outer side
(thumb side). Ulna is slightly bigger than
radius. The lower end of humerus (trochlea)
articulates with olecranon process of ulna,
forming elbow joint.
iii. Eight carpels: There are short bones present
in two rows and form the wrist. The upper row
articulates with the radius and forms the wrist
joint also called radiocarpal joint.
iv. Five metacarpals: These bones make up the
palm of the hand.
v. Fourteen phalanges: Each finger has 3
phalanges while the thumb has 2 phalanges.

| Bones | Numbers |
| :--- | :--- |
| Pectoral Girdle | 04 |
| Humerus | 02 |
| Radius | 02 |
| Ulna | 02 |
| Carpals | 16 |
| Metacarpals | 10 |
| Phalanges | 28 (hands) |
| Pelvic Girdle | 02 |
| Femur | 02 |
| Tibia | 02 |
| Fibula | 02 |
| Patella | 02 |
| Tarsals | 14 |
| Metatarsals | 10 |
| Phalanges | 28 (feet) |
| Total | 126 |

Axial Skeleton
Cranium
Skull
Facial bones
Middle ear
Ossicles
Neck bone
(Hyoid)
Chest bone
(Sternum)
Ribs
Vertebral column

Appendicular
Skeleton
Pectoral girdle
Humerus
Ulna
Radius
Pelvic girdle
Carpals
Metacarpals
Phalanges
Femur
Patella
Tibia
Fibula
Tarsals
Metatarsals
Phalanges

Figure: Human Skeleton

--- Page 9 ---
c. Pelvic girdle: It is made up of a pair of hip bones. Each hip bone (coxal bone) contains 3
fused bones i.e., ilium, ischium and pubis. In each hip bone, there is a bony socket,
called acetabulum that is formed by the fusion of three bones. The two hip bones are
joined at the front by the pubic symphysis (a cartilaginous joint that connects the pubic
bones at the midline of the body).
d. Hind limbs: Each hind limb (leg, ankle, foot, toes) consists of 30 bones.
i. One femur: It is a long thigh bone. Its head fits into the acetabulum of pelvic girdle. It is
the largest human bone.
ii. One patella or knee cap: It is a small triangular sesamoid bone (i.e. it is embedded in
quadriceps tendon).
iii. One tibia and one fibula: Tibia or shin bone is the large bone in the leg. Fibula or outer
bone is a thin bone that joins the tibia just below the knee joint and just above the ankle.
iv. Seven tarsals: These are short bones which are tightly attached to form the ankle.
v. Five metatarsals: These bones articulate with the tarsal and phalanges to form the sole
of the foot.
vi. Fourteen phalanges: Each toe has 3 phalanges while the big toe comprises 2 phalanges.
Q6. Define joints. Write a detailed classification of joints.
Ans. Joint: A joint is a place where two bones or bone and cartilage come together.
Types: Three major kinds of joints are found in human body on the basis of structure i.e.,
fibrous (immoveable) joints, cartilaginous (slightly moveable) joints and synovial (freely
moveable) joints.
1. Fibrous Joints: In fibrous joints, the bones are directly connected to each other by
fibrous connective tissue consisting mainly of collagen. These joints permit no movement of
bones.
Examples of fibrous joints include:
• Sutures that occur only between the immovable bones of the skull.
• Joints between the tibia and fibula bones in the lower leg.
• Joints between teeth and their sockets in the jawbone.
2. Cartilaginous Joints: In these joints, the bones are connected by a layer of cartilage.
Cartilaginous joints allow little movement of the bones.
Types: There are two main types of cartilaginous joints:
i. Primary cartilaginous joints (synchondrosis): In some cartilaginous joints, the bones
are connected by hyaline cartilage. For example, the joint between the first rib and
sternum (sternocostal joint).
ii. Secondary cartilaginous joints (symphysis): In some cartilaginous joints, the bones are
connected by fibrocartilage. For example, pubic symphysis in the pelvic girdle and
intervertebral discs.

--- Page 10 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

                                     FIBROUS JOINTS
                                     Connected by dense connective
                                     tissue made mostly of collagen.
                                     They are fixed and immovable.

                                     CARTILAGINOUS JOINTS
                                     Connected entirely by cartilage.
                                     They provide cushioning between
                                     bones.

                                     SYNOVIAL JOINTS
                                     Joins bones with fibrous joint capsule.
                                     They are filled with synovial fluid, which
                                     lubricates the joints during movement.

                     Fig: Types of joints on the basis of structure

3. Synovial joints
A type of joint which is characterized by a fluid filled cavity surrounded by a fibrous
capsule. Synovial joints are the most common type of joint in the human body, and they
allow a wide range of movement.
Components of synovial joint
Synovial joint is composed of:
• Articular cartilage
• Fibrous capsule (joint capsule)
• Synovial fluid
• Ligaments
Articular Cartilage: A smooth,
tough, and elastic hyaline cartilage,
called articular cartilage, covers the
ends of the bones in the joint. It
provides a smooth and frictionless
surface for movement.

                                     Bone 1 -------------------- Ligament
                                                                Synovial membrane
                                     Articular                  Fibrous capsule
                                     cartilage -----------------
                                     Bone 2 -------------------- Synovial fluid

                                     Figure: Structure of a synovial joint

Fibrous Capsule: A fibrous capsule surrounds the synovial joint and helps to hold the
bones together. The fibrous capsule is composed of an outer layer of ligaments and an inner
lining of synovial membrane.
Synovial Fluid: Synovial membrane secretes synovial fluid, which lubricates the joint.
Ligaments: Strong bands of connective tissue that connect the bones in the joint are called
ligaments.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 11 ---
Q7. Define synovial joint. Classify synovial joints on the basis of range of motion. / Define synovial joint. Write its components and classification.
Ans. Definition: A type of joint which is characterized by a fluid filled cavity surrounded by a fibrous capsule.
Components of synovial
joint
Synovial joint is composed
of:
• Articular cartilage
• Fibrous capsule (joint
capsule)
• Synovial fluid
• Ligaments
Articular Cartilage: A
smooth, tough, and elastic
hyaline cartilage, called
articular cartilage, covers
the ends of the bones in the
joint. It provides a smooth
and frictionless surface for
movement.
Fibrous Capsule: A
fibrous capsule surrounds
the synovial joint and helps
to hold the bones together.
The fibrous capsule is
composed of an outer layer
of ligaments and an inner
lining of synovial
membrane.
Synovial Fluid: Synovial
membrane secretes
synovial fluid, which
lubricates the joint.
Ligaments: Strong bands of connective tissue that connect the bones in the joint are called
ligaments.
Classification: There are six main types of synovial joints based on the range of motion.
i. Ball-and-socket joint allow motion in all directions e.g., shoulder and hip joints.
ii. Hinge joint allow movement in only one plane, like a door hinge e.g., elbow and knee
joints.
iii. Pivot joint allow rotational movement around a single axis e.g., joint between the first
(Atlas-C1) and second (Axis-C2) vertebrae of the neck.

--- Page 12 ---
iv. Ellipsoidal joint allow movement in two planes, but not rotation e.g., joint of wrist
with radius.
v. Saddle joint allow movement in two planes because one bone has a concave surface
and the other has a convex surface e.g., thumb, sternoclavicular and incudomalleolar
joints (joint between malleus and incus of middle ear ossicles).
vi. Gliding (Plane) joint allow gliding movements between bones e.g., joints between the
vertebrae and the joints between the bones in wrist (inter-carpal) and ankle (inter-tarsal).
★Q8. What is joint transplantation/Arthroplasty? Describe most common types of
joint transplantation.
Ans. Joint Transplantation: It is a surgical procedure in which a damaged joint is
replaced with a healthy natural joint (from donor) or an artificial joint.
Types: The most common types of joint transplantation are:
1. Total arthroplasty / Total joint replacement: In this procedure, the entire damaged
joint is replaced with an artificial joint made of metal, plastic, or ceramic.
2. Partial arthroplasty / Partial joint replacement: In this procedure, only the damaged
part of the joint is replaced with an artificial component. This is often used in the knee
joint.
3. Allograft transplantation: In this procedure, a healthy joint from a donor is
transplanted to replace the damaged joint. This technique is often used in the ankle and
knee joints.
4. Chondrocyte implantation: In this procedure, chondrocytes from patient's own
joint are implanted into the damaged joint. This technique is often used in the knee
joint.
★Q9. How the bipedal posture of humans is linked to skeleton and musculature?
Which problems can arise due to improper posture?
Ans. Human Skeleton & Musculature helps in Bipedal Posture
(a) The bipedal posture of humans is linked to skeleton and
musculature in several ways.
• S-Shaped Vertebral Column: The human vertebral column
has a distinctive S-shaped curve, which helps to distribute
weight evenly and maintain balance while standing and
walking.
• Broad and Short Pelvis: Human pelvis is shorter and
broader, which helps to stabilize the torso (body excluding the
head, neck and limbs, also called trunk) and support the
body's weight on two legs.
• Angled Femur: The human femur is also angled inward
towards the knee joint, which helps to keep the body's centre
of mass over the feet. It allows stability while standing and
walking.
• Gluteal Muscles: The muscles are located in the buttocks
(gluteus maximus, gluteus medius and gluteus minimus), are
much larger in humans. They play a crucial role in stabilizing
the torso and propelling the body forward while walking.
S-Shaped
Vertebral Column

--- Page 13 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

• Calf Muscles: The calf muscles (gastrocnemius and soleus) are also well-developed in
humans, providing power for walking and running.
Medial view of the foot Lateral view of the foot
Medial Longitudinal Arch Lateral Longitudinal Arch
Fig: Longitudinal Arches of foot
• Longitudinal Arches of Foot: Human foot has a longitudinal arches (medial and
lateral) that helps to absorb shock and distribute weight evenly across the foot.
• Short and Less Prehensile Toes: The toes are shorter and less prehensile (not adapted
for grasping or holding), allowing the foot to function more effectively as a lever during
walking and running.
(b) Problems due to Improper Posture
Improper posture can negatively affect bones and joints, causing:
i. Vertebral Misalignment: This can lead to back and neck pain, and herniated discs by
putting pressure on vertebrae and nerves.
ii. Joint Strain: Poor posture can strain neck, shoulders, hips, and knees, leading to pain,
inflammation, and potentially arthritis.
iii. Muscle Imbalance: Overused and underused muscles from poor posture can pull bones
and joints out of alignment.
Disorders of the Skeleton
Q10. Describe the causes and symptoms of disc-slip.
Ans. Disc Slip: The intervertebral discs
between vertebrae act as shock absorbers
and help in movement. A herniated or
slipped disc occurs when the outer layer
of the intervertebral disc tears or ruptures,
causing the inner gel-like substance to
leak out and press against nearby nerves
or spinal cord.
Causes: It may be caused due to
• Trauma
• Degenerative changes due to aging.
• Repetitive strain on vertebral column.
Symptoms: Symptoms of slipped disc
include pain, numbness, or tingling in
the affected area, weakness or loss of
muscle function, and in severe cases,
bowel or bladder dysfunction.
Vertebra
Herniated
disc
Pressed
nerve
Lumbar vertebrae
Fig: Disc Slip (Herniation)

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 14 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q11. Write causes and symptoms of Spondylosis and Sciatica.
Ans. Spondylosis: Spondylosis means degeneration of vertebrae, intervertebral discs,
ligaments or cartilage of vertebral column. It may result in narrowing and fusion of
intervertebral disc and
development of bone outgrowths.
It puts pressure on the nerves or
spinal cord. Spondylosis is most
common in the lower back
(lumbar vertebrae) and neck
(cervical vertebrae).
Causes: The most common cause
is the natural degeneration of
intervertebral discs. It occurs
with aging, genetic factors,
trauma, and prolonged periods
of poor posture and obesity.
Symptoms: Symptoms include
back or neck pain, stiffness, and reduced range of motion.
Sciatica: Sciatica means compression or irritation of the sciatic nerve. The sciatic nerve
starts from lower back and goes
down through the buttocks into
each leg.
Causes: Sciatica is often caused
by a herniated disc or bulging
disc, which can put pressure on
the sciatic nerve. Other causes of
sciatica include trauma,
infection, inflammation, and
spondylosis.
Symptoms: Symptoms include
pain or discomfort in the lower
back, buttocks, legs, or feet,
tingling or numbness in the legs
or feet, weakness or difficulty
moving the legs or feet, most
precisely flexion off leg is lost
gradually.
Q12. Describe the types of arthritis with their causes, symptoms and treatment.

Ans. Definition: The inflammation of joints or its components is called arthritis.
Arthritis includes different inflammatory conditions that affect the joints.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 15 ---
Symptoms: Symptoms include pain, stiffness, redness, warmth and swelling in affected
joints.
Types: The following are important types of arthritis.
1. Osteoarthritis: Osteoarthritis is the most common type. It occurs when the articular
cartilage at the ends of bones in joints gradually softens and disintegrates. It affects
knee, hip and intervertebral joints.
2. Rheumatoid arthritis:
Rheumatoid arthritis is the result
of an autoimmune disorder in
which synovial membrane
becomes inflamed. Most
commonly, the wrist and hands
are involved.
3. Gouty Arthritis: Gouty
arthritis (or gout) occurs when
there is a build-up of uric acid
in the blood, which can form
crystals in the joints and cause
inflammation. The most common joint affected is the joint of the big toe. Other joints
(knees, wrists and fingers) may also be affected.
Q13. Write a note on osteoporosis.
Ans. Osteoporosis: Osteoporosis literally means 'porous bones' it is a condition
characterized by decreased density, amount and thickness of bone tissue, leading to weak,
fragile and thin bones.
Causes: Its causes include.
• Aging: Due to aging bone mass naturally
decreases. But it can be more pronounced
in some individuals.
• Drop in oestrogen levels: In women, a
drop in oestrogen levels after menopause
accelerates bone loss.
• Lack of calcium and vitamin D: Lack of
calcium and vitamin D in the diet can
impair bone health. Calcium is crucial for
bone strength, while vitamin D helps the
body absorb calcium. Lack of weight-
bearing exercise: Lack of weight-bearing
exercise can lead to weakened bones
especially in post-menopausal women.
• Long-term use of corticosteroids:
Certain treatments such as long-term use
of corticosteroids, can contribute to bone
loss.

--- Page 16 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

• Smoking and alcohol consumption: Smoking and alcohol consumption can also increase
the risk of osteoporosis.
• Treatment: Osteoporosis is treated according to its cause e.g., Estrogen replacement
therapy (ERT) in case of drop in estrogen levels in postmenopausal women.
Q14. Describe some common injuries to joints. / Describe dislocation and sprain in
context of joint injuries. Also describe their first aid treatment.
Ans. Injuries to Joints: Joints can be subject to a variety of injuries, which can result in
pain, swelling, and reduced motion. Here
are some common injuries to joints:
Dislocations: Dislocation or luxation
refers to a medical term for abnormal
separation or disruption of the normal
position of bones at joint.
Causes
• Its causes include natural
degeneration of intervertebral discs.
• This can happen as a result of a sudden
impact or trauma.
• A severe dislocation can cause tearing
of the muscles, ligaments and
tendons.
• Rheumatoid arthritis can also cause
joint dislocation.
Symptoms
• Symptoms include swelling, intense
pain, and immobility of the affected
joint.
Treatment: Surgery may be needed to
repair or tighten the stretched ligaments. A
dislocated joint can only be successfully
corrected by a physiotherapist.
Sprain: A sprain is an injury to the
ligaments that connect bones in a joint.
Commonly injured ligaments are in the
ankle, knee and wrist.
Causes: This can happen when the joint is
forced beyond its normal range of motion,
causing the ligaments to over stretch or
tear
Treatment: Sprains are usually treated
with physical therapy. Dressings is done to
immobilize the sprain and provide support.
First aid Treatment for Dislocation and

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 17 ---
Sprain
First aid treatment for dislocation
and sprain includes the following
steps:
i. Immobilize the affected area:
Keep the affected area
immobile and do not attempt to
re-align the dislocated joint.
Use a sling or splint to support
the limb.
ii. Apply ice: Apply an ice pack
or cold compress to the
affected area to reduce swelling
and pain.
iii. Elevate the affected limb: In
the case of dislocation, if
possible, elevate the affected limb above to help reduce swelling.
iv. Seek medical attention: Dislocations and sprain require medical attention. so call for
emergency medical services 1122 or take the person to the hospital for further evaluation
and treatment.
Q15. Describe the three types of muscles.
Ans. Definition: Muscle is defined as the tissue that can contract in a coordinated way to
produce movements of body parts or whole body. The individual cells of muscle are called
muscle fibres or myofibres or
myocytes.
Types of Muscles: Human body has
three types of muscle tissues: skeletal,
smooth, and cardiac.
i. Skeletal Muscles: Skeletal
muscles are responsible for
moving parts of the body, such
as the limbs, trunk, and face. The
muscle fibres of skeletal muscles
are elongated cells with striations
have many nuclei per cell.
Because their contractions are
usually consciously controlled,
skeletal muscles are called as
voluntary muscles.
ii. Smooth Muscles: Smooth
muscles are present in the walls of
the stomach, intestines, blood
vessels, and other internal organs.

--- Page 18 ---
Smooth muscle fibres are spindle-shaped, have a single nucleus and lack striations.
Smooth muscle fibres are surrounded by connective tissue. Because most of their
movements cannot be consciously controlled, smooth muscle is referred to as
involuntary muscle.
iii. Cardiac Muscles: These are found only in the walls of the heart (myocardium). Their
fibres branch extensively. The muscle fibres of cardiac muscles are striated like skeletal
muscle, but each cell usually contains one nucleus located near the centre and is
involuntary in control.

| Comparison of three types of muscle tissues | | | |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Property** | **Skeletal Muscle** | **Smooth Muscles** | **Cardiac Muscles** |
| Appearance | Regular striped | Un-striped | Irregular striped |
| Cell shape | Spindle or cylindrical | Spindle | Branched |
| Number of nuclei | Many per cell | One per cell | One per cell |
| Voluntary control | Have voluntary control | Usually, no voluntary control | No voluntary control |
| Function | To move skeleton | To move substances through hollow organs | To pump blood |

Q16. Explain the ultrastructure of skeletal muscle.
Ans. Structure of Skeletal Muscles: The cells of skeletal muscles i.e., muscle fibres
(myofibres) are in the form of bundles which are enclosed by collagen fibres and connective
tissue. At the ends of a skeletal muscle, the collagen and connective tissue forms tendons
which attach the muscle to bones.
Ultrastructure of Skeletal Muscles: Each skeletal muscle cell i.e., muscle fibre is a
cylindrical multinucleated cell, enclosed by a plasma membrane called sarcolemma. Its
cytoplasm is called sarcoplasm (have organelles, enzymes and glycogen) and it contains
sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), SER of skeletal muscles have stored Ca++ and no ribosomes.
The sarcolemma penetrates deep into the cell to form hollow elongated tubes, the
transverse tubules (T-tubules). The T-tubules reach the ends of SR.
Myofibrils: Each muscle fibre contains a bundle of 4 to 20 elongated threadlike
structures called myofibrils. Myofibrils are made up of two types of filaments.
1. Thick filaments composed of myosin. The thick filaments create dark bands called A-
bands.
2. The thin filaments are composed of actin. create light bands called I-bands. These
alternating dark and light bands give skeletal muscle its striped (striated) appearance.
• Z-lines: The thin actin filaments are attached to protein discs called Z-lines. The section
between two Z-lines is a sarcomere, the smallest unit of muscle contraction. Within a
sarcomere, the thin filaments extend from the Z-line toward the center. where they
overlap with thick filaments. This overlap creates the A-band, with a lighter central
region called the H-zone/H-band where no overlap occurs.

--- Page 19 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Bundle of
muscle fibres
Sarcolemma
Muscle fibre
(a cell)
Sarcolemma
Sarcoplasmic
reticulum
T-tubule
Skeletal
muscle
Tendon
Sarcoplasmic
reticulum
Sarcolemma makes T-tubules
Myofibril
Sarcomere
H zone
Actin
myofilament
I band
A band
I band
Myosin
myofilament
Z line
Myosin
Actin
Figure: Ultrastructure of skeletal muscle fibre
During muscle contraction, the thin filaments slide deeper into the A-band, causing the H-
band and I-band to narrow. The A-bands are pulled closer together, shortening the muscle.
The center of the H-band may have a dark line called the M-line which helps stabilize the
thick filaments.
Q17. Describe the biochemistry of myofilaments.
Ans. Biochemistry of Myofilaments
Thick myofilaments: Thick
myofilaments, about 16 nm in diameter,
are made up of many myosin proteins.
Each myosin protein consists of two
intertwined polypeptide chains, ending
in a globular "head". These myosin
heads extend from the thick filaments
and connect to actin during muscle
contraction.
Thin myofilaments: Thin myofilaments,
7-8 nm in diameter, are made of three
proteins: i.e. actin tropomyosin and
troponin.
(i) Core is made of two twisted strands
of actin.
Thick filament
2 Polypeptides
Globular
heads
Myosin molecule
Actin Troponin Tropomyosin
Thin filament
Figure: Structure of myofilaments
[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 20 ---
(ii) Two strands of tropomyosin wrap about actin core and stiffen it. In a relaxed muscle
fibre, they block myosin binding sites on actin.
(iii) Troponin protein is present at regular intervals on thin myofilaments. It is made of three
polypeptides.
• One polypeptide is inhibitory (TnI) and binds to actin.
• Second polypeptide binds to tropomyosin (TnT) to keep it in place.
• The third polypeptide binds to calcium ions (TnC).
Q18. Write a detailed note on sliding filament model of muscle contraction.
Ans. Mechanism of Muscle Contraction - Sliding Filament Model
The sliding filament model explains how a muscle contracts. According to this model, a
muscle contracts when its thin myofilaments slide past the thick ones so that they overlap to
a greater degree.
Steps: It occurs in the following steps.
1. Sarcomeres at relaxed state: In a relaxed muscle, sarcomeres are at their normal
length. The myosin heads are not bound to actin because the binding sites on actin are
blocked by tropomyosin of thin filaments. Troponin, another protein, is attached to
tropomyosin. Myosin heads have hydrolysed ATP into ADP and Pi.
2. Arrival of Nerve Impulse: When a nerve impulse reaches the muscle fibre, it travels
along the sarcolemma to the T-tubules and then to the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). The
SR releases calcium ions into the cytosol. These calcium ions bind to troponin, causing
it to shift tropomyosin away from the myosin-binding sites on actin.

• Binding sites on actin are blocked;
• Myosin head has hydrolysed ATP
into ADP and Pi.

• ATP attaches with myosin head;
• Myosin head detaches from actin.

• Ca ions bind with troponin;
• Binding sites on actin are open;
• Myosin heads attach with actin

• Myosin heads release ADP and Pi;
• Heads undergo conformational
change and pull actin filament
towards centre.

Figure: Steps of a power stroke (cross bridge cycle)

--- Page 21 ---
3. Cross-bridges and Power-stroke: When binding sites on actin are exposed, the myosin
heads bind to them and form cross-bridges. Once the cross-bridges are formed, the
myosin heads release the ADP and Pi, and undergo conformational change. They bend
towards the centre of sarcomere, pulling actin filaments with them. This pulling action is
called a power stroke.
It shortens the sarcomere, bringing Z-lines closer together and H-zone disappears. It
occurs simultaneously in all sarcomeres, causing the muscle to contract. The adjacent A-
bands of sarcomeres come closer to each other but do not shorten.
4. Separation of Myosin Heads from Actin: After pulling, the myosin head receives a
new molecule of ATP. This allows the head to detach from actin. Splitting of this ATP
into ADP and Pi puts the head into its original conformation, allowing the cross-bridge
cycle to begin again.
Q19. Elaborate the arrangement of skeletal muscles of moveable joints to aid various
movements. / Describe the antagonistic arrangement of skeletal muscle with examples.

Ans. Skeletal muscles are attached to bones by tough connective tissues called tendons.
Parts of structural muscle: Typically, a muscle has two attachment points on different
bones. The end attached to the stationary bone during contraction is called the origin, while
the end attached to the bone that moves is the insertion. The middle part of the muscle is
known as the belly.
Antagonism: For the movement of bones at a joint in two directions muscles work in pairs.
They produce opposing actions when they contract. Such arrangement of muscles is called
antagonistic arrangement.
Flexor: The muscle which bends the bone at joint upon contraction is called flexor.
Extensor: The muscle which straightens the bone at joint upon contraction is called
extensor. During such antagonistic action, when a muscle e.g., flexors contracts, the other
muscle i.e., extensor is relaxed and vice versa.
• Movement at Knee Joint as an example of antagonistic movement: The knee joint is
located between the femur (thigh bone) and the tibia and fibula (lower leg bones).
Flexion: Flexion, or bending, of the lower leg is done by the hamstrings. It is a group of
three muscles at the back of the thigh.
Origin of hamstrings: The hamstrings originate at the pelvic girdle and the top of the
femur.
Insertion of hamstrings: It is inserted at the upper parts of the fibula and tibia.
Extensions: Extension, or straightening, of the lower leg is done by the quadriceps. It is a
group of four muscles at the front of the thigh.
Origin of Quadriceps: The quadriceps originate at the ilium (part of the pelvic girdle) and
femur.
Insertion of quadriceps: It is inserted at the patella (knee cap) and tibia. When the hamstrings
contract, the lower leg bends and the quadriceps relax. When the quadriceps contract,
the lower leg straightens and the hamstrings relax.

--- Page 22 ---
Q20. Describe causes and symptoms of muscle fatigue, cramps and tetany.
Ans. Muscle Disorders: The following are some common muscle disorders
1. Muscle Fatigue: Muscle fatigue means a decline in muscle performance that occurs
after prolonged or intense physical activity or due to some disease.
Causes: The following factors contribute to muscle fatigue:
i. Low ATP: During exercise, the muscles use ATPs to contract. When the supply of ATPs
is depleted, the muscle is no longer able to contract.
ii. Metabolic Waste: As muscles work, they produce metabolic wastes e.g., lactate,
hydrogen ions, and reactive oxygen. These wastes contribute to muscle fatigue.
iii. Ca++ ion handling: When muscle fibres are repeatedly activated, they are not able to
effectively handle calcium ions, which can impair muscle function.
iv. Damage to muscle fibres: Prolonged or intense exercise can cause small amounts of
damage to muscle fibres, leading to inflammation and reduced muscle function.
Symptoms: Its symptoms include pain, decreased muscle strength, and reduced
endurance. Muscle fatigue typically improves with rest. If it is severe, it requires medical
attention.
2. Muscle Cramps
Muscles cramps are sudden, involuntary and often painful contractions of a muscle or
group of muscles. They usually last from a few seconds to several minutes and most
commonly occur in the legs and feet.
Causes
i. Dehydration
ii. Imbalance of salts
iii. Overuse or injury of the muscle
iv. Medications (like diuretics)
v. Medical conditions such as diabetes
vi. Liver disease
vii. Nerve damage
Treatment: To relieve muscle cramps, gently stretch and massage the affected muscle.
Applying heat or cold to the area and using pain-relieving medications can also help.
3. Tetany
Tetany is a condition characterized by involuntary muscle contractions or spasms due to
increased muscle tone and hyperexcitability of the nerves. These contractions can occur
in various parts of the body such as hands, feet, face or larynx.
Causes
(i) The most common cause of tetany is hypocalcaemia (low level of calcium in blood)
which may be due to vitamin D deficiency.
(ii) Renal failure or thyroid disorders.
(iii) Salts imbalances, such as low level of magnesium in blood.
Treatment: Treatment for tetany depends on the underlying cause. If tetany is caused by
salts imbalances, treatment may involve calcium or magnesium supplements or intravenous
fluid to restore electrolyte balance.

--- Page 23 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Difference between Tetany and Tetanus
| Tetany | Tetanus |
| :--- | :--- |
| • Tetany involves increased muscles tone and overactive nerves, causing involuntary muscle creations or spasms. | • Tetanus is a severe bacterial infection caused by Clostridium tetani, which produces a toxin affecting the nervous system, leading to muscle stiffness and spasms. |
| • Tetany can affect various body parts like the hands, feet, face or larynx. | • Tetanus mainly affects the jaw and neck muscles. |
| • Tetany can result from issues like electrolyte imbalances or nerve problems. | • Tetanus is caused by a specific bacterial infection. |
| • Tetany is less serious and usually not life-threatening as compared to tetanus. | • Tetanus is more serious and potentially life-threatening compared to tetany. |

★Q20.Justify how the main functions of the skeleton are to act as a system of rods and levers.
Ans. Skeleton is a system of rods and levers: The skeleton works like a system of rods and levers. Bones act as the rods, giving structure and support to the body and protecting internal organs.
In this system, joints serve as fulcrums (pivot points) for the levers, allowing movement. Muscles generate the effort or force, while the weight or resistance being moved is the load.
For example, when lifting a weight, the bicep muscle in the upper arm acts as a lever. The elbow joint is the fulcrum, the bicep provides the effort, and the weight is the load.
★Q21.Justify why do muscles pull but don't push?
Ans. Muscles can only pull: Muscles can only pull, not push. This is because muscle fibres are designed to contract and shorten, pulling on tendons and thus moving bones.
When a muscle contracts, it pulls on the bone via the tendon, and when it relaxes, the bone moves back to its original position.
Muscles cannot push because they only generate force by pulling. If a muscle were to push, it would need to be attached to bones at both ends and make both ends move closer together,
which is not possible in the body. Muscles are usually attached to bone at only one end.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch12 Long Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [11/36]: 11th Bio New Ch12 MCQ's.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
Unit 12: Human Skeletal and Muscular Systems

Multiple Choice Questions

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)

1. Which structures are part of the
appendicular skeleton?
(a) Ethmoid bone
(b) Floating ribs
(c) Lumber vertebrae
(d) Humerus bone

2. The term muscle fibre or myofibre
refers to;
(a) A cellular organelle
(b) A cell
(c) A tissue
(d) An organ

3. Which of these extends the entire
length of a muscle fibre?
(a) Sarcomere
(b) Myofibril
(c) Myosin filament
(d) Actin filament

--- Page 2 ---
4. Actin filaments are made of proteins;
(a) Myosin and troponin
(b) Actin and troponin
(c) Actin and myosin
(d) Actin, tropomyosin and troponin
5. In a muscle, the Z-line are the proteins
for the attachment of the ends of;
(a) Actin filaments
(b) Myosin filaments
(c) Both actin and myosin filaments
(d) Sarcomeres
6. Sarcomere is a part between;
(a) Two H-lines (b) Two A-bands
(c) Two Z-lines (d) Two I-bands
7. Which part of muscle fibre releases
calcium ions which trigger
contraction?
(a) Sarcolemma (b) Sarcoplasm
(c) T-tubules
(d) Sarcoplasmic reticulum
8. Which statement is correct to describe
sliding filament model of muscle
contraction?
(a) Myosin filaments pull on the
sarcomere so that actin filaments are
shortened
(b) Myosin filaments pull on actin filaments
so that sarcomere is shortened
(c) Actin filaments pull on myosin
filaments so that sarcomere is
shortened.
(d) Actin filaments pull on sarcomere so that
myosin filaments are shortened.
9. When a muscle fibre shortens, which
of the following also shortens?
(a) Actin filament
(b) Myosin filament
(c) Sarcomere (d) Z-line
10. Which statement correctly describes
an event of muscle contraction?
(a) Myosin heads bind to troponin.
(b) ATP binds to the actin binding site.
(c) ATP is used to detach the myosin
head from actin.
(d) Troponin blocks the binding sites.
11. Tendons connect bone and;
(a) Bone (b) Ligaments
(c) Muscle (d) Cartilage
12. What is true about antagonistic pair
of muscles?
(a) It provides a backup if one of the
muscles is injured
(b) One muscle pushes while other pulls
(c) It allows muscles to produce
opposing movements
(d) It doubles the strength of contraction

SLO BASED MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
Bone and Cartilage
13. The broad ends of a bone are called:
(a) Epiphysis (b) Diaphysis
(c) Metaphysis (d) Paraphysis
14. The middle part of long bone along
the length is called:
(a) Diaphysis (b) Shaft
(c) Epiphysis (d) Both (a) & (b)
15. A dense layer of vascular connective
tissue enveloping the bones except at
the surface of the joints is called:
(a) Periosteum (b) Fascia
(c) Fasciculus (d) Pericardium
16. The thick layer under the periosteum;
made up of hard material, osteocytes,
collagen is called:
(a) Spongy bone (b) Compact bone
(c) Callus (d) All of above
17. The basic structural units of compact
bone are called:
(a) Neural canal (b) Haversian canal
(c) Haversian system (d) Lacuna
18. The concentric layers of mineralized
extra cellular matrix that contains
collagen fibres & needle shaped

--- Page 3 ---
crystals of calcium phosphate is:
(a) Lacunae (b) Haversian canal
(c) Lamellae (d) Canaliculi
19. The concentric layers of lamellae
surround a central canal are called:
(a) Medullary canal
(b) Haversian canal
(c) Lacunae
(d) Periosteum
20. Red marrow is found in:
(a) Ends of long bones
(b) Ribs
(c) Pelvis and sternum
21. Yellow marrow:
(a) Fills the shafts of long bones
(b) Consists mostly of fat cells
(c) Serves as an energy reserve
22. Which of the following is incorrect
about yellow marrow?
(a) Produces WBCs
(b) Can be converted into red marrow
(c) It is energy reserve
(d) It is present in shaft of long bones
23. The body mass formed by bones is:
(a) 80%
(b) Less than 20%
(c) Greater than 30%
(d) 59%
24. The type of bone cells which secrete
unmineralized ground substances are:
(a) Osteocytes (b) Osteoblasts
(c) Osteoclast
(d) Osteoprogenitor cells
25. The bone cells which maintain healthy
bone tissue by secreting enzymes and
bone mineral content, also regulate
calcium release from bones are:
(a) Osteocytes (b) Osteoblasts
(c) Fibroblasts (d) Osteoclasts
26. The cells of bones which are
important to the growth and repair of
bone are:
(a) Osteogenic cells (b) Stem cells
(c) Osteoblasts (d) Osteoclasts
27. Identify the cell:
(a) Osteoblast
(b) Osteoclast
(c) Mature bone cell
(d) Stem cell
28. The process of formation
of bone is called:
(a) Ossification (b) Remodelling
(c) Osteoporosis (d) Osteogenesis
29. The step of osteogenesis by which
cartilage is replaced by bone by the
deposition of minerals is called:
(a) Ossification (b) Crystallization
(c) Petrification (d) Osteoporosis
30. Layer of connective tissue that
surrounds the cartilage having blood
vessels and nerves is called:
(a) Periosteum (b) Perichondrium
(c) Piliferous layer (d) Peritoneum
31. The cells that make the cartilage
matter are:
(a) Lacunae (b) Osteocytes
(c) Chondrocytes (d) Oligodendrocytes
32. The type of cartilage which is found in
areas of the body that experience high
stress and tension is:
(a) Fibro cartilage
(b) Hyaline cartilage
(c) Elastic cartilage
(d) Both (b) and (c)
33. The most abundant and the most
common type of cartilage is:
(a) Fibro cartilage
(b) Hyaline cartilage
(c) Elastic cartilage
(d) All of the above
34. Which of the following is found in
epiglottis?
(a) Elastic cartilage
(b) Hyaline cartilage
(c) Fibro cartilage (d) Annulus fibrosus

--- Page 4 ---
35. Having limited repair-ability, no
direct blood vessels/supply, the most
likely it is:
(a) Liver (b) Cartilage
(c) Bone (d) Adipose tissue
Skeleton
36. The adult human skeletal system
consists of ___ bones.
(a) 22 (b) 80
(c) 365 (d) 206
37. Which of the following is NOT the
part of axial skeleton?
(a) Skull (b) Spine
(c) Sternum (d) Patella
38. All of the following belongs to brain
box (except):
(a) Vomer (b) Frontal bone
(c) Ethmoid (d) Sphenoid bond
39. Inferior nasal concha belongs to:
(a) Maxilla (b) Brain box
(c) Facial structure (d) Rib cage
40. The number of paired and unpaired
facial bones are:
(a) 2,4 (b) 6,2
(c) 2,6 (d) 4,2
41. Pick the odd one:
(a) Nasal (b) Larcimal
(c) Maxilla (d) Vomer
42. Small single bone, which lies at the
base of skull below tongue, does not
articulate with any other bone is:
(a) Stapes (b) Atlas
(c) Hyoid (d) Sternum
43. Which of the following shows the
correct sequence of vertebrae?
(a) Cervical, thoracic, lumber, pelvic
(b) Lumber, cervical, pelvic, cervical
(c) Thoracic, pelvic, lumber, cervical
(d) Pelvic, cervical, lumber, thoracic
44. The 8th, 9th and 10th pairs of ribs are
attached to the sternum by means of:
(a) Common costal cartilage
(b) Articular cartilage
(c) Meniscus cartilage
(d) Fibro cartilage
45. Clavicle articulates with:
(a) Sternum, scapula
(b) Vertebrae, ribs
(c) Pelvic girdle
(d) Tibia, fibula
46. Long bone, having spherical head,
which fits into glenoid cavity is:
(a) Femur (b) Tibia
(c) Ischium (d) Humerus
47. The total number of phalanges in an
adult is:
(a) 14 (b) 26
(c) 28 (d) 56
Joints
48. The type of joint in which bones are
directly connected to each other by
collagen are called:
(a) Saddle joints
(b) Fibrous joints
(c) Pivot joints
(d) Cartilaginous joint
49. Sutures occur between:
(a) Moveable bones of skull
(b) Tibia and fibula
(c) Teeth and their sockets
(d) Immovable bones of skull
50. Which of the following is an example
of cartilaginous joints?
(a) Pubic symphysis (b) Sutures
(c) Hip joint (d) Shoulder joint
51. The most common type of joints in the
human body are:
(a) Fibrous joints
(b) Synovial joints
(c) Cartilaginous joints
52. The joint which allow movement in
two planes, one bone having concave
surface, other having convex surface
is:
(a) Gliding joint (b) Pivot joint
(c) Saddle joint (d) Hinge joint

--- Page 5 ---
53. Rotational movement around single
axis is the characteristic of:
(a) Pivot joint
(b) Ball and socket joint
(c) Fibrous joint (d) Synovial joint
54. The procedure in which a healthy
joint from a donor is transplanted to
replace the damaged joint, is called:
(a) Total joint replacement
(b) Particle joint replacement
(c) Allograft transplantation
(d) Chondrocyte implantation
55. The human vertebral column has a
distinctive ________________ curve.
(a) C-shaped (b) S-shaped
(c) Y-shaped (d) H-shaped
Disorders of Skeletal System
56. Which problems can arise due to
improper posture?
(a) Vertebral misalignment
(b) Joint strain
(c) Muscle imbalances
57. What will be your probable diagnosis
if a patient present to you with pain,
numbness, tingling in affected area,
bowel and bladder dysfunction?
(a) Spondylosis (b) Arthritis
(c) Herniated disc (d) Sciatica
58. Choose the incorrect statement about
disc slip.
(a) May be caused due to trauma
(b) May be caused due to vertebral
misalignment
(c) Degenerative changes due to aging
(d) Result of autoimmune disorder
59. The most common cause of
spondylosis is:
(a) Natural degeneration of intervertebral
discs
(b) Aging (c) Genetic factors
(d) Trauma

60. A female presented to you with pain in
lower back, buttocks & legs. She has
difficulty in moving the legs. What is
your possible diagnosis?
(a) Rheumatoid arthritis
(b) Spondylosis
(c) Sciatica (d) Disc-slip
61. The most common type of arthritis is:
(a) Osteoarthritis
(b) Rheumatoid arthritis (c) Gout
(d) Ankylosing arthritis
62. An autoimmune synovial disorder in
which synovial membrane becomes
inflamed, most commonly wrist and
hands, is:
(a) Carpal tunnel syndrome
(b) Spondylosis
(c) Rheumatoid arthritis (d) Gout
63. A male of 63 years comes to Dr. Asif
(Orthopedic physician), complains of
severe pain in the 1st tarsometatarsal
joint. His blood reports show high
levels of uric acid. What will be most
likely the discords he is suffering
from?
(a) Gouty arthritis
(b) Osteoarthritis
(c) Hypophosphatemic rickets
(d) Osteoporosis
64. A condition characterized by
weakened bones, bone density
decreased, is most likely:
(a) Osteodystrophy (b) Osteoporosis
(c) Osteoarthritis (d) Spondylosis
65. Which of the following class of drugs
may cause osteoporosis?
(a) Tetracyclines (b) NSAID
(c) Corticosteroids
(d) Vit. D supplements
66. Dislocated joint can only be
successfully corrected by a:
(a) Pulmonologist (b) Rheumatologist
(c) Physiotherapist (d) Pathologist

--- Page 6 ---
67. An injury to the ligament is called as:
(a) Strain (b) Sprain
(c) Stress (d) Twist
68. An injury to tendon is called:
(a) Strain (b) Sprain
(c) Tendonitis (d) Wrick
69. The first aid treatment for joint
dislocation and sprain includes:
(a) Immobilize the affected area
(b) Apply ice and elevate affected limb
(c) Call for emergency medical service
Muscles
70. The study of muscles is called:
(a) Mycology (b) Myology
(c) Algology (d) Phycology
71. Which of the following tissue has the
ability to contract in a coordinated
way to produce movements?
(a) Adipose tissue (b) Nervous tissue
(c) Muscle tissue (d) Connective tissue
72. The individual cells of the muscles are
called:
(a) Myofibers (b) Muscle fibres
(c) Myocytes (d) All of above
73. The tissue responsible for providing
the force that pushes substances, such
as blood and food through the body is:

(a) Nervous tissue (b) Muscle tissue
(c) Adipose tissue (d) Connective tissue
74. Regularly striped, cylindrical,
voluntary control are the key features
of:
(a) Cardiomyocytes (b) Skeletal muscles
(c) Smooth muscles (d) Ciliary muscles
75. Un-stripped, spindle shaped, one
nucleus per cell are the characteristics
of:
(a) Cardiac muscle (b) Smooth muscle
(c) Skeletal muscle
(d) Voluntary muscles
76. The commonality between skeletal
muscles and cardiac muscles is:
(a) Strips/striations
(b) One nucleus/cell
(c) Voluntary control
(d) Movement of skeleton
77. The similarity between smooth and
cardiac muscles is:
(a) Both are evolved at the same time
(b) Both are involuntary
(c) Both are striped
(d) Both are cylindrical shape
78. The collagen fibres and connective
tissue which attach the muscle to bone
are:
(a) Ligaments (b) Fascia
(c) Chords (d) Tendons
79. Sarcolemma is
(a) Cytoplasm of skeletal muscle fibre
(b) Endoplasmic reticulum of muscle
fibre
(c) Plasma membrane of myocyte
(d) Sarcomere
80. Each muscle fibre contains elongated
thread like structures called
myofibrils.
(a) 2 to 4 (b) 4 to 10
(c) 15 to 20 (d) 4 to 20
81. The thick myofilaments create:
(a) I-band (b) Z-band
(c) A-band (d) H-band
82. The thin active filaments are attached
to protein discs called:
(a) M-line (b) Z-line
(c) H-Zone (d) A-band

--- Page 7 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

83. The smallest unit of muscle
contraction is called:
(a) Sarcomere
(b) Sarcoplasmic reticulum
(c) Sarcoplasm
(d) I-band
84. The correct summary of structural
organization of a skeletal muscles are
(a) Muscle fibres → myofibril →
myofilaments
(b) Myofibril → muscle fibre →
myofilaments
(c) Myofilaments, myocyte,
microfilaments
(d) Both (b) & (c)
85. There are ___ types of myofilaments
(a) 2 (b) 18
(c) 100 (d) 25
86. The thin filaments overlap with thick
filaments which creates
(a) I-band (b) H-band
(c) A-band (d) Z-line
87. The dark line in the center of H-band
is called:
(a) I-line (b) Z-line
(c) M-line (d) both (a) & (b)
88. Thick myofilaments are about ___ in
diameter:
(a) 7-8nm (b) 14 µm
(c) 16 nm (d) 1-2 µm
89. Thin myofilaments are about ___ in
diameter:
(a) 100 µm (b) 1-2 µm
(c) 16 nm (d) 7-8 nm
90. The protein stand which wrap about
active core and stiffen it, is
(a) Myosin (b) Troponin
(c) Tropomyosin (d) G-protein
91. Twisted strand of pearls is the
characteristic of:
(a) Myosin (b) Actin
(c) Troponin (d) Tropomyosin
92. When a nerve impulse reaches
sarcolemma___ is released by motor
neuron at synapse.
(a) Ca++ (b) Acetylcholine
(c) ATP (d) Dopamine
93. Sliding filaments model explains
(a) Composition of muscle fibre
(b) Physiology of muscle contraction
(c) Stiffening of muscles after death
(d) Levels of organizations of muscles
94. The 2nd step of sliding filament model
is:
(a) Sarcomeres at relaxed state
(b) Arrival of nerve impulse
(c) Cross bridges and power stroke
(d) Separation of myosin heads
95. When a muscle contracts, what does
not happen?
(a) Sarcomere shortens
(b) Z-lines move apart
(c) H-zone disappears
(d) A-bands came closer
96. The stiffening of muscles after death is
called:
(a) Myasthenia gravis
(b) Rigor mortis
(c) Muscle fatigue (d) Tetany
97. The end of skeletal muscle which is
attached to stationary bone during
contraction is:
(a) Origin (b) Insertion
(c) Belly (d) Ligament
98. The muscle which bends the bone at
joint during contraction is:
(a) Flexor (b) Extensor
(c) Medial rotator (d) Pronator
99. Flexion or bending of lower leg is done
by.
(a) Quadriceps femoris (b) Biceps
(c) Gastrocnemius (d) Hamstrings
100. The hamstring muscle originates
at:
(a) Pelvic girdle and top of femur
(b) Pectoral girdle and biceps tendon
(c) Pelvic girdle and lower femur
(d) Patella
101. The extensors of lower leg are
(a) Hamstrings (b) Quadriceps

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                 [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 8 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

(c) Rectus femoris (d) Gluteus
102. Decline in muscle performance
after prolonged or intense physical
activity with pain, decreased muscle
strength and reduced endurance
indicates.
(a) Cramps (b) Tetany
(c) Muscle fatigue (d) Tetanus
103. Sudden, involuntary painful
tetanic contraction of muscle or group
of muscles most commonly in feet and
legs, occurs in:
(a) Myositis (b) Cramps
(c) Sciatica (d) Tetanus
104. Involuntary muscle contractions
or spasm due to increased muscle tone
and hyperexcitability of the nerves
characterize:
(a) Tetany (b) Tetanus
(c) Cramps (d) Epilepsy
105. The most common cause of tetany
is:
(a) Hypercalcemia (b) Hypokalemia
(c) Hypocalcemia (d) Hyperoxalemia
106. Pick the disease which is
potentially life-threating and more
serious.
(a) Tetany (b) Sciatica
(c) Ischemia of lower limb
(d) Tetanus
107. In human skeleton, joints serve as _
and bones act as ______.
(a) Fulcrums, rods (b) Rods, load
(c) Fulcrums, load (d) Rods and lever

ANSWER KEY
| 1. | d | 2. | b | 3. | b | 4. | d | 5. | a | 6. | c | 7. | d | 8. | b |
| 9. | c | 10. | c | 11. | c | 12. | c | 13. | a | 14. | d | 15. | a | 16. | b |
| 17. | c | 18. | c | 19. | b | 20. | d | 21. | d | 22. | d | 23. | b | 24. | b |
| 25. | a | 26. | d | 27. | c | 28. | d | 29. | a | 30. | b | 31. | c | 32. | a |
| 33. | b | 34. | a | 35. | b | 36. | d | 37. | d | 38. | a | 39. | c | 40. | b |
| 41. | d | 42. | c | 43. | c | 44. | a | 45. | a | 46. | d | 47. | d | 48. | b |
| 49. | d | 50. | a | 51. | b | 52. | c | 53. | a | 54. | c | 55. | b | 56. | d |
| 57. | c | 58. | d | 59. | a | 60. | c | 61. | a | 62. | c | 63. | a | 64. | b |
| 65. | c | 66. | c | 67. | b | 68. | a | 69. | d | 70. | b | 71. | c | 72. | d |
| 73. | b | 74. | b | 75. | b | 76. | a | 77. | b | 78. | d | 79. | c | 80. | d |
| 81. | c | 82. | b | 83. | a | 84. | a | 85. | a | 86. | c | 87. | c | 88. | c |
| 89. | d | 90. | c | 91. | b | 92. | b | 93. | b | 94. | b | 95. | b | 96. | b |
| 97. | a | 98. | a | 99. | d | 100. | a | 101. | b | 102. | c | 103. | b | 104. | a |
| 105. | c | 106. | d | 107. | a | | | | | | | | | | | |

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch12 MCQ's.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [12/36]: 11th Bio New Ch12 Short Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 12: Human Skeletal and Muscular Systems

Short Questions

SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS EXERCISE

Q.1 Name three types of cells
associated with bone and write their
functions.

Ans. Types of Bone Cells

There are three types of cells i.e.,
osteoblasts, osteocytes, and osteoclasts
involved in the development, growth and
remodelling of bones.

1. Osteoblasts are bone forming cells that
synthesize and secrete unmineralized
ground substance. Once the osteoblasts
are surrounded by matrix, they become
the osteocytes.

2. Osteocytes are mature bone cells which
maintain healthy bone tissue by
secreting enzymes and bone mineral

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
content. They also regulate the calcium
release from bone tissue to blood.
3. Osteoclasts develop from macrophages
and are involved in bone resorption, i.e.,
they break down bone and release
calcium and phosphate in blood.
Osteoblasts
(form bone matrix)
Osteoclast
(resorbs bone)
Osteogenic cell
(stem cell)
Osteocyte
(mature bone cell)
Q.2 Name the bones of cranium.
Ans. Eight cranial bones form cranium
also called brain box.
i. Paired bones: Two paired bones,
parietal and temporal.
ii. Unpaired bones: Four unpaired bones,
Frontal, occipital, ethmoid and sphenoid.
Q.3 Enlist the bones in the five groups
of vertebrae.
Ans. Vertebral column: It consists of 33
vertebrae. The vertebrae make five groups:
i. Seven cervical vertebrae: These are the
vertebrae of the neck. The first one is
called atlas and the second one is called
axis.
ii. Twelve thoracic vertebrae: These are
rib-carrying vertebrae and are found in
chest region.
iii. Five lumbar vertebrae: These are
present in abdominal region.
iv. Five sacral vertebrae: These are five
fused vertebrae forming the sacrum. The
sacrum articulates with the iliac bones of
the hip to form the back of the pelvis.
v. Four coccygeal vertebrae or coccyx:
These vertebrae are fused in the adults.
Sacral and coccygeal vertebrae are
together called pelvic vertebrae.
Q.4 What bones make the rib cage?
Ans. The rib cage consists of 24 bones (12
pairs) called ribs and a sternum. The
sternum (chest bone) is a long flat bone
located in the central part of the chest. The
ribs articulate posteriorly with the thoracic
vertebrae.
True ribs: On anterior side, first 7 pairs of
ribs attach directly with the sternum by
means of separate costal cartilages. These
are called true ribs.
False ribs: The 8th, 9th and 10th pairs
attach to the sternum by means of a common
costal cartilage and are called false ribs.
Floating ribs: The last 2 pairs of ribs (11th
and 12th) are known as floating ribs,
because they do not attach to the sternum.
Q.5 Name the bones of pectoral girdle
and pelvic girdle
Ans. Pectoral girdle: It consists of 2 pairs
i.e., a pair of clavicles (collar bones) and a
pair of scapulae (shoulder bones). One end
of each clavicle articulates with the sternum.
The other end articulates with the scapula.
Pelvic girdle: It is made up of two hip
bones. Each hip bone contains 3 fused bones
i.e., ilium, ischium and pubis. In each hip
bone, there is a bony socket, called
acetabulum that is formed by the fusion of
three bones. The two hip bones are joined at
the front by the pubic symphysis (a
cartilaginous joint that connects the pubic
bones at the midline of the body).
Q.6 Name the bones of forelimbs and hindlimbs.
Fore Limb
• One humerus
• One ulna and one radius
• Eight carpels
• Five meta carpels
• Fourteen phalanges
Hindlimb
• One femur
• One tibia and one fibula, one patella
• Seven tarsals
• Five metatarsals
• Fourteen phalanges

--- Page 3 ---
Q.7 What is fibrous joint? Give examples.
Ans. Fibrous Joints: In fibrous joints, the bones are directly connected to each other by fibrous connective tissue consisting mainly of collagen. These joints permit no movement of bones. Examples of fibrous joints include:
• Sutures that occur only between the immovable bones of the skull.
• Joints between the tibia and fibula bones in the lower leg.
• Joints between teeth and their sockets in the jawbone (mandible).
Q.8 Name the steps involved in bone repair.
i. Hematoma formation
ii. Soft callus formation
iii. Bony callus formation
iv. Remodelling
Q.9 Which skeletal structures are affected from the osteoarthritis?
Ans. Osteoarthritis is the most common chronic arthritic. It occurs when the articular cartilage at the ends of bones in joints gradually softens and disintegrates. It affects knee, hip and intervertebral joints.
Q.10 List the major parts of skeletal muscle fibre.
Ans. Each skeletal muscle cell i.e., muscle fibre is a cylindrical multinucleated cell, enclosed by a plasma membrane called sarcolemma. Its cytoplasm is called sarcoplasm and it contains sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). The sarcolemma penetrates deep into the cell to form hollow elongated tubes, the transverse tubules (T-tubules). The T-tubules reach the ends of SR.
Q.11 What do you mean by I-band, A-band and H-zone?
I-Band: The thin filaments of myobril in a muscle cell create light bands called I-band (isotropic: they can't polarize light). These thin filaments are attached to protein discs called Z-lines (Zwishen: in between) They are composed of actin.
A-band: The thick filaments of myofibril in muscle fibre create dark bands called A-Band (Anisotropic: they can polarize light). They are composed of myosin.
H-zone: The region in A-Band which appears lighter (where no overlap between thick and thin filaments occur) is called H-zone (hele = bright).
Q.12 Describe the antagonistic arrangement of skeletal muscles.
Ans. For the movement of bones at a joint in two directions muscles work in pairs. They produce opposing actions when they contract. Such arrangement of muscles is called antagonistic arrangement. In such arrangement, when one muscle, called flexor, contracts it bends the bone at joint. When the opposing muscle, called extensor, contracts it straightens the bone at joints.
• During antagonistic action, when a muscle e.g., flexors contracts, the other muscle i.e., extensor is relaxed and vice versa.
Q.13 Ligaments are elastic while tendons are hard. Justify.
• Ligaments can stretch slightly under stress and retain to their original shape due to higher amount of elastin.
• Tendons are stiffer and resist stretching to efficiently transfer muscle forces due to higher collagen and relatively low elastin.
Q.14 Draw a diagram of sarcomere and label its parts.
[Image of sarcomere diagram]
Figure: Sliding filament model of muscle contraction

--- Page 4 ---
Q.15 Differentiate between:
• Compact and spongy bone
• Axial skeleton and appendicular skeleton
• True ribs, false ribs and floating ribs
• Rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis
• Fibrous and cartilaginous joints
• Cartilaginous and synovial joint
• Osteoblasts and osteocytes
• Tropomyosin and troponin
• Ligament and tendon
• Tetany and tetanus
Ans. Compact and spongy bone
| Compact bone | Spongy bone |
| :--- | :--- |
| • The outer thick layer of bone under the periosteum is called compact bone. | • The inner thin layer of bone under compact bone is called spongy bone. |
| • It is made of hard material. | • It is made up of latticework structure, consisting of bony spikes making it light and strong. |
| • It provides attachment and surface for muscles. | • It contains bone marrow so acts as a site for blood cells production. |

Axial skeleton and appendicular skeleton
| Axial skeleton | Appendicular skeleton |
| :--- | :--- |
| • The axial skeleton forms the axis of the body. Its bones support and protect the organs of the head, neck, and chest. | • Appendicular skeleton includes the bones present in appendages (arms and legs). |
| • It consists of skull, ribs, spine, and sternum. | • These are pectoral girdle, pelvic girdle, forelimbs and hind limbs. |

True ribs, false ribs and floating ribs
| True ribs | False ribs | Floating ribs |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| • The first seven pairs of ribs articulate directly with sternum by means of separate costal cartilages, these are called true ribs. | • The 8th, 9th and 10th pairs of ribs are attached to sternum by means of common costal cartilage, are called false ribs. | • The last 2 pairs of ribs 11th, 12th do not attach to the sternum, that's why they are called floating ribs. |

Rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis
| Rheumatoid Arthritis | Osteoarthritis |
| :--- | :--- |
| • It is result of an autoimmune disorder in which synovial membrane becomes inflamed. | • The type of arthritis in which articular cartilage at ends of bones in joints gradually softens and disintegrates. |

--- Page 5 ---
• Most commonly, the wrist and hands
are involved.
• It affects knee, hip and intervertebral
joints.
Fibrous and cartilaginous joints
Fibrous joints
• In fibrous joints, the bones are directly
connected to each other by fibrous
connective tissue consisting mainly
of collagen.
• These joints permit no movement of
bones. Examples of fibrous joints
include:
• Sutures that occur only between the
immovable bones of the skull.
Cartilaginous joints
• In these joints, the bones are connected
by a layer of cartilage.
• Cartilaginous joints allow little
movement of the bones.
• There are two main types of
cartilaginous joints:
(i) Primary cartilaginous joints
(synchondrosis)
(ii) Secondary cartilaginous joints
(symphysis)
Cartilaginous and synovial joint
Cartilaginous joint
• The type of joints in which, the bones
are connected by a layer of cartilage.
Cartilaginous joints allow little
movement of the bones.
• There are two main types of
cartilaginous joints:
• Primary cartilaginous joints
(synchondrosis): In some cartilaginous
joints, the bones are connected by hyaline
cartilage e.g., the joint between the first
rib and sternum
• Secondary cartilaginous joints
(symphysis): In some cartilaginous
joints, the bones are connected by
fibrocartilage e.g., pubic symphysis in
the pelvic girdle and intervertebral
discs.
Osteoblasts and osteocytes
Osteoblasts
• Osteoblasts are bone forming cells that
synthesize and secrete unmineralized
ground substance.
• Once the osteoblasts are surrounded by
matrix, they become the osteocytes.
Synovial joint
• Synovial joints are the most common
type of joint in the human body, and
they allow a wide range of movement.
• A smooth, tough, and elastic hyaline
cartilage, called articular cartilage,
covers the ends of the bones in the joint.
• It provides a smooth and frictionless
surface for movement.
• A fibrous capsule surrounds the
synovial joint.
• The fibrous capsule is composed of an
outer layer of ligaments and an inner
lining of synovial membrane, which
secretes synovial fluid, that lubricates
the joint.
Osteocytes
• Osteocytes are mature bone cells
which maintain healthy bone tissue by
secreting enzymes and bone mineral
content.
• They also regulate the calcium release
from bone tissue to blood.

--- Page 6 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Tropomyosin and troponin
| Tropomyosin | Troponin |
| :--- | :--- |
| The thin myofilaments have two strands of polypeptides which wrap actin core and stiffen it. In a relaxed muscle fibre, they block myosin binding sites on actin. | Troponin is a component of thin myofilaments present at regular intervals. It is made up of three polypeptides. TnI = inhibitory polypeptide TnT = binds to tropomyosin TnC = binds calcium ions. |

Ligament and tendon
| Ligaments | Tendons |
| :--- | :--- |
| • They are connective tissues which attach bone to bone. | • They are connective tissues which attach muscles to bones. |
| • They are slightly elastic. | • They are non-elastic/inelastic. |
| • Example: Lateral and medial ligaments of foot. | • Example: Biceps tendon. |

Tetany and tetanus
| Tetany | Tetanus |
| :--- | :--- |
| • Tetany is a condition characterized by involuntary muscle contractions or spasms due to increased muscle tone and hyperexcitability of the nerves. | • Tetanus is a severe bacterial infection caused by Clostridium tetani, which produces a toxin affecting the nervous system, leading to muscle stiffness and spams. |
| • The most common cause of tetany is hypocalcaemia (low level of calcium in blood) which may be due to vitamin D deficiency. | • Tetanus mainly affects the jaw and neck muscles. |
| • Tetany can affect various body parts like the hands, feet, face or larynx. | • Tetanus is more serious and potentially life-threatening compared to tetany. |
| • Tetany is less serious and potentially not life-threatening compared to tetanus. | |

SLO BASED SHORT QUESTION ANSWERS
Bone and Cartilage
Q.16 What are Haversian canals? Describe their components.
Haversian canal: the concentric layers of lamellae surround a central canal called the Haversian canal.
Components: It contains blood vessels, nerves and lymphatic vessels.
In addition to these structures, there are small channels that run perpendicular to the Haversian canals and connect them with each other and with the periosteum. Collagen fibres anchor the periosteum to the underlying bone tissue, providing additional strength and stability to the bone.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 7 ---
Q.17 Sketch a bone and label its parts.
Figure: Structure of bone
Q.18 What is bone marrow? Differentiate between red and yellow marrow.
Ans. Many bones contain a soft tissue called bone marrow, which can be either red or yellow.
• Red bone marrow is found in spongy bone, the ends of long bones, ribs, vertebrae, the sternum, and the pelvis. It produces red blood cells, platelets, and white blood cells.
• Yellow bone marrow fills the shafts of long bones. It consists of fat cells and serves as an energy reserve. It can also be converted to red bone marrow and produce blood cells when severe blood loss occurs.
Q.19 Define osteogenesis. Describe the formation of long bones.
Ans. Definition
• The process of bone formation is also called osteogenesis.
Formation
• It begins during embryonic development and continues throughout life, playing a vital role in growth, maintenance, and repair of bones.
• There are two primary pathways of osteogenesis.
• The formation of long bones e.g., femur and humerus, involves the transition of cartilage into bone. In this process, the center of cartilage begins to harden (calcify), and the chondrocytes (cartilage cells) in this area die, leaving behind cavities. Blood vessels penetrate these cavities and introduce osteoblasts and osteoclasts.
Q.20 Describe the formation of short bone.
• A few bones, e.g., some bones of the skull, develop directly into hard bone without forming cartilage first.
• In these cases, the osteocytes are initially scattered randomly throughout the embryonic connective tissue but soon fuse into layers and become flat plates of bones.
Q.21 Define Ossification.
Ans. The step in the formation of bone by which cartilage is replaced by bone by the deposition of minerals is called ossification.
★Q.22. Define periosteum, also describe the parts of bone.
• Periosteum: The bone's surface is covered by a tough layer of connective tissue called periosteum.
• Parts of bone: The broad ends of a bone are called epiphysis while the middle part along the length of bone is called diaphysis or shaft.
Figure: Structure of bone
Q.23 Describe the composition of perichondrium and cartilage matrix.
• A layer of connective tissue called perichondrium surrounds the cartilage.
• It contains blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and nerves that supply the cartilage tissue.
• Inside perichondrium is the cartilage matrix which is composed of collagen, elastin, proteoglycans, and other fibres. It

--- Page 8 ---
gives the tissue its strength, flexibility,
and resistance to compression.
• Unlike other connective tissues, there are
no blood vessels inside cartilage matrix.
The cells of cartilage are supplied by
diffusion. Because of this, it heals very
slowly

Q.24 Which cells are present in
cartilages how they are related to
lacunae?
• The cartilage cells, called chondrocytes,
are present within small spaces called
lacunae, which are embedded in cartilage
matrix. Chondrocytes are responsible for
synthesizing and maintaining the matrix
of cartilage.

Q.25 Describe the comparison between bone and cartilage.
Comparison between Bone and Cartilage
Feature Bone Cartilage
External covering Periosteum Perichondrium
Cell types Osteoblast, osteocytes and
osteoclasts
Chondrocytes
Extracellular
matrix
Contains calcium crystals and
collagen fibres
Contains collagen and other
fibres
Blood vessels Present Absent
Growth & repair Have the ability to grow and
repair themselves throughout life
Has limited ability to repair
itself, as it has no direct blood
supply

Q.26 Name the facial bones.
• Fourteen facial bones are attached to the
cranium.
• The 6 paired bones are lacrimal,
zygomatic, nasal bones, inferior nasal
concha, maxilla and palatine.
• The 2 unpaired bones are mandible
(lower jaw bone) and vomer.
Q.27 Name the bones of middle ear and
neck.
• Middle ear: There are 6 bones (3 pairs)
in middle ears. These are called ossicles
and include malleus, incus and stapes.
• Neck bone: Hyoid bone is a small single
bone which lies at the base of skull below
the tongue. It does not articulate with any
other bone of head.

Q.28 What is fibrous capsule or joint
capsule? Give its composition.
Ans. A fibrous capsule surrounds the
synovial joint and helps to hold the bones
together. The fibrous capsule is composed of
an outer layer of ligaments and an inner
lining of synovial membrane, which secretes
synovial fluid, which lubricates the joint.
Q.29 Name the types of synovial joints
base on range of motion with one example
each.
Ans. There are six main types of synovial
joints based on the range of motion.
• Ball-and-socket joints allow movement
in all directions e.g., shoulder and hip
joints.
• Hinge joints allow movement in only one
plane, like a door hinge e.g., elbow and
knee joints.

--- Page 9 ---
• Pivot joints allow rotational movement
around a single axis e.g., joint between the
first and second vertebrae of the neck.
• Ellipsoidal joints allow movement in
two planes, but not rotation e.g., joint
of wrist with radius.
• Saddle joints allow movement in two
planes because one bone has a concave
surface and the other has a convex
surface e.g., thumb joint.
• Gliding joints allow gliding movements
between bones e.g., joints between the
vertebrae and the joints between the
bones in wrist and ankle.

Q.30 What is joint transplant? Describe
total and partial joint replacement.
Ans. Joint Transplantation
It is a surgical procedure in which a
damaged joint is replaced with a healthy
natural joint (from donor) or an artificial
joint. The most common types of joint
transplantation are:
Total joint replacement: In this procedure,
the entire damaged joint is replaced with an
artificial joint made of metal, plastic, or
ceramic.
Partial joint replacement: In this
procedure, only the damaged part of the joint
is replaced with an artificial component.
This is often used in the knee joint.

Q.31 Differentiate between allograft transplantation and chondrocyte implantation.
Allograft
• It is a type of joint transplantation in which
a healthy joint from a donor is
transplanted to replace the damaged joint.
• This technique is often used in the ankle
and knee joints.

Chondrocyte Implantation
• It is a surgical procedure, in which
chondrocytes from patient's own joint
are implanted into the damaged joint.
• This technique is often used in the knee
joint.

Disorders of Skeletal System
Q.32 What problems can arise due to
improper posture?
Ans. Problems due to Improper
Posture: Improper posture can negatively
affect bones and joints, causing:
Vertebral misalignment: This can lead to
back and neck pain, and herniated discs by
putting pressure on vertebrae and nerves.
Joint strain: Poor posture can strain neck,
shoulders, hips, and knees, leading to pain,
inflammation, and potentially arthritis.
Muscle imbalances: Overused and
underused muscles from poor posture can
pull bones and joints out of alignment
Q.33 How an intervertebral disc gets
herniated? Describe its causes and
symptoms.
Ans. The intervertebral discs between
vertebrae act as shock absorbers and help in
movement.

Causes
• A herniated or slipped disc occurs when
the outer layer of the intervertebral disc
tears or ruptures, causing the inner gel-
like substance to leak out and press
against nearby nerves or spinal cord. It
may be due to a trauma, degenerative
changes due to aging, or repetitive strain
on vertebral column.
Symptoms: Symptoms of slipped disc
include pain, numbness, and tingling in
the affected area, weakness or loss of
muscle function, and in severe cases, bowel
or bladder dysfunction.
Q.34 Define spondylosis describe its
causes and symptoms.
• Spondylosis means degeneration of
vertebrae, intervertebral discs, ligaments
or cartilage of vertebral column.

--- Page 10 ---
Causes: The most common cause is the
natural degeneration of intervertebral discs.
It occurs with aging, genetic factors, trauma,
and prolonged periods of poor posture and
obesity.
Symptoms: Symptoms include back or neck
pain, stiffness, and reduced range of motion.
Spondylosis is most common in the lower
back (lumbar vertebrae) and neck
(cervical vertebrae).
Q.35 Describe the course of sciatic nerve.
How it gets compressed? Name the disease
and describe its symptoms.
Ans. The sciatic nerve is a spinal nerve
which starts from the lower lumber region of
spinal cord in the lower back and descends
through the buttocks innervating the muscles
of each leg.
Causes
• Herniated disc or bulging disc, can put
pressure on the sciatic nerve, trauma,
infection, inflammation, and spondylosis
resulting into a disease called sciatica.
• Symptoms: Symptoms include pain or
discomfort in the lower back, buttocks, legs
or feet, tingling or numbness in the legs or
feet, weakness or difficulty moving the
legs or feet.
Q.36 Define arthritis. How it show its
menifestations?
Ans. Arthritis is the inflammation of joints
and includes different inflammatory
conditions that affect joints.
Symptoms: Symptoms of include joint pain
and stiffness. Other symptoms may include
redness, warmth, swelling in affected joints.
Q.37 Characterize Gout.
Ans. Gouty arthritis (or gout) occurs when
there is a build-up of uric acid in the blood,
which can form crystals in the joints
and cause inflammation.
• The most common joint affected is the
joint of the big toe.
• Other joints (knees, wrists and fingers)
may also be affected.
Q.38 What will be your most likely
diagnosis of a women of 60 years age
presenting with pain in legs, her lab tests
show decreased bone density and low
levels of oestrogen? Name the disease and
its causes.
• It is most probably the case of
osteoporosis. Osteoporosis is a condition
characterized by weakened bones that are
more prone to fractures and breaks. It
occurs when bone density decreases,
making the bones fragile and porous. Its
causes include:
• As people age, bone mass naturally
decreases. But it can be more pronounced
in some individuals.
• In women, a drop in oestrogen levels after
menopause accelerates bone loss. Lack of
calcium and vitamin D in the diet can
impair bone health.
• Long-term use of corticosteroids, can
contribute to bone loss.
• Smoking and alcohol consumption can
also increase the risk of osteoporosis.
• Lack of weight-bearing exercise can lead
to weakened bones.
Q.39 Define bone dislocation. Write its
possible causes and symptoms.
Ans. Bone dislocation is a medical term,
which refers to a condition in which the
bones in a joint are forced out of their
normal positions.
Causes
• This can happen as a result of a sudden
impact or trauma. A severe dislocation
can cause tearing of the muscles,
ligaments and tendons.
• Rheumatoid arthritis can also cause joint
dislocation.
Symptoms: Symptoms include swelling,
intense pain, and immobility of the affected
joint.
• A dislocated joint can only be
successfully corrected by a
physiotherapist. Surgery may be needed to
repair or tighten the stretched ligaments.
Q.40 Define sprain. Write its common
points and causes.
Ans. A sprain is an injury to the ligaments
that connect bones in a joint. Commonly

--- Page 11 ---
injured ligaments are in the ankle, knee and wrist.
Causes
• This can happen when the joint is forced beyond its normal range of motion, causing the ligaments to over stretch or tear.
• Sprains are usually treated with physical therapy. Dressings is done to immobilize the sprain and provide support.
Q.41 A patient presented to you with road side accident suffering from dislocation of his elbow joint and sprain in ankle. How first aid will be given to him?
Ans. First aid treatment for dislocation and sprain includes the following steps.
Immobilize the affected area: Keep the affected area immobile and do not attempt to re-align the dislocated joint. Use a sling or splint to support the limb.
Apply ice: Apply an ice pack or cold compress to the affected area to reduce swelling and pain.
Elevate the affected limb: In the case of dislocation, if possible, elevate the affected limb above to help reduce swelling.
Seek medical attention: Dislocations and sprain require medical attention, so call for emergency medical services 1122 or take the person to the hospital for further evaluation and treatment.
Muscles
★Q42.How mosquito and earthworm employ muscles?
Ans. Muscles' ability to contract and relax not only enables the body to move, but also provides the force that pushes substances, such as blood and food, through the body.
• When a mosquito files, its wings are move rapidly through the air by quickly contacting flight muscles.
• When an earthworm burrows through the soil, its movement is driven by strong muscles pushing its body past the surrounding soil.
Q.43 Differentiate between smooth and cardiac muscles.
Smooth Muscles
• Smooth muscle fibres are spindle-shaped, have a single nucleus and lack striations.
• Smooth muscles are present in the walls of the stomach, intestines, blood vessels, and other internal organs. Because most of their movements cannot be consciously controlled, smooth muscle is referred to as involuntary muscle.
Cardiac Muscles
• The muscle fibres of cardiac muscles are striated like skeletal muscle, but each cell usually contains one nucleus located near the centre.
• These are found only in the walls (myocardium) of the heart. Their fibres branch extensively.
Q.44 Define sarcolemma, sarcoplasm and SR.
Ans. Sarcolemma
• Each skeletal muscle cell i.e., muscle fibre is a cylindrical multinucleated cell, enclosed by a plasma membrane called sarcolemma.
Sarcoplasm
• Its cytoplasm is called sarcoplasm. It has organelles enzymes and glycogen.
• Sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), SER of skeletal muscles have stored Ca++ and no ribosomes.
• The sarcolemma penetrates deep into the cell to form hollow elongated tubes, the transverse tubules (T-tubules). The T-tubules reach the ends of SR.

--- Page 12 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

★Q45. How nerve impulse propogates on
a reaching sarcolemma?
Ans. When a nerve impulse reaches
sarcolemma, a neurotransmitter
(acetylcholine) is released by motor neuron
at the synapse. It stimulates the sarcolemma
to produce its own electrochemical impulses
which are carried into the muscle fibre to the
T tubules.
Q.46 Draw the sketch of cardiac muscle.
[Image of cardiac muscle with labels: Striations, Intercalated disk, Nucleus]
Figure: Cardiac muscles
Q.47 Draw the sketch of ultra-structure
of myofilaments.
[Image of Myosin filament with labels: 2 Polypeptides, Heads, Myosin molecule]
[Image of Actin filament with labels: Actin Troponin Tropomyosin]
Figure: Structure of myofilament
Q.48 Define cross-bridge and power
stroke.
Ans. Cross bridge: When binding sites on
actin are exposed, the myosin heads bind to
them and form cross-bridges.
Power stroke: Once the cross-bridges are
formed, the myosin heads release the ADP
and Pi, and undergo conformational change.
They bend towards the centre of sarcomere,
pulling actin filaments with them. This
pulling action is called a power stroke.
★Q49. Give the summary of structural
organization of skeletal muscle.

Ans. A skeletal muscle is made of groups
of cells called muscle fibres. Each muscle
fibre contains bundles of myofibrils in its
cytoplasm. Each myofibril is made of 2
types of myofilaments (myosin and actin).
Q.50 What is sliding filament model?
Enlist its steps.
Ans. The sliding filament model explains
how a muscle contracts. According to this
model, a muscle contracts when its thin
myofilaments slide past the thick ones so
that they overlap to a greater degree. It
occurs in the following steps.
• Sarcomere at relaxed state
• Arrival of nerve impulse
• Cross-bridges and power stroke
• Separation of myosin heads from actin
★Q51. After death, what changes occur in
the dead body? / Why does muscles
become stiff after death? / What do you
know about rigor mortis?
Ans. It is a state of stiffness or rigidity
of muscles after death due to ATP deficit,
the cells can no longer produce ATP and
therefore the cross-bridges cannot be
broken. It causes the muscle stiffness of
death, or rigor mortis. A living cell,
however, always has enough ATP to allow
the myosin head to detach from actin.
Q.52 Differentiate between origin and
insertion. Write the origin and insertion
of quadriceps.
Ans. Typically, a muscle has two
attachment points on different bones.
Origin: The end attached to the stationary
bone during contraction is called the
origin.
Quadriceps: The quadriceps originate at
the ilium (part of the pelvic girdle and
femur).
Insertion: The end attached to the bone that
moves is the insertion. The middle part of
the muscle is known as the belly.
Example: Insertions at the patella (knee
cap) and tibia.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 13 ---
Q.53 Compare flexor with extensor. How they move a bone?
Ans. Flexor: The muscles which bends the bone at joint upon contraction is called flexor e.g., biceps brachii` hamstrings.
Extensor: The muscle which straightens the bone at joint upon contraction is called extensor e.g., triceps brachii, quadriceps.
During such antagonistic action, when a muscle e.g., flexors contracts, the other muscle i.e., extensor is relaxed and vice versa.
Q.54 How does flexion and extension occur at knee-joint? Which muscles are involved in knee-join movements?
Ans. Movement at Knee Joint
The knee joint is located between the femur (thigh bone) and the tibia and fibula (lower leg bones).
Flexion or bending, of the lower leg is done by the hamstrings. It is a group of three muscles at the back of the thigh.
Extension or straightening, of the lower leg is done by the quadriceps. It is a group of four muscles at the form of the thigh.
• When the hamstrings contract, the lower leg bends and the quadriceps relax.
• When the quadriceps contract, the lower leg straightness and the hamstrings relax.
Q.55 Define muscle cramps describe its causes, how it can be relieved?
Ans. Muscle cramps are sudden, involuntary, and often painful contractions of a muscle or group of muscles. They usually last from a few seconds to several minutes and most commonly occur in the legs and feet.
• Common causes include dehydration, an imbalance of salts, overuse or injury of the muscle, certain medications (like diuretics), and medical conditions such as diabetes, liver disease, and nerve damage.
• To relieve muscle cramps, gently stretch and massage the affected muscle. Applying heat or cold to the area and using pain-relieving medications can also help.
Q.56 Characterize tetany. Write its causes and treatment.
Ans. Tetany is a condition characterized by involuntary muscle contractions or spasms due to increased muscle tone and hyperexcitability of the nerves. These contractions can occur in various parts of the body such as hands, feet, face, or larynx.
Causes
• The most common cause of tetany is hypocalcaemia (low level of calcium in blood) which may be due to vitamin D deficiency, renal failure, or thyroid disorders.
• Tetany may also be due to other salts imbalances, such as low level of magnesium in blood.
• Treatment for tetany depends on the underlying cause. If tetany is caused by salts imbalances, treatment may involve calcium or magnesium supplements or intravenous fluids to restore electrolyte balance.
Q.57 Skeleton is a system of rods and levers. Justify.
Ans. The skeleton works like a system of rods and levers. Bones act as the rods, giving structure and support to the body and protecting internal organs.
In this system, joints serve as fulcrums (pivot points) for the levers, allowing movement. Muscles generate the effort or force, while the weight or resistance being moved is the load.
For example, when lifting a weight, the bicep muscle in the upper arm acts as a lever. The elbow joint is the fulcrum, the bicep provides the effort, and the weight is the load.
Q.58 Muscles pull but do not push. Comment.
Ans. Muscles can only pull, not push. This is because muscle fibres are designed

--- Page 14 ---
to contract and shorten, pulling on tendons and thus moving bones. When a muscle contracts, it pulls on the bone via the tendon, and when it relaxes, the bone moves back to its original position.
Muscles cannot push because they only generate force by pulling. If a muscle were to push, it would need to be attached to bones at both ends and make both ends move closer together, which is not possible in the body. Muscles are usually attached to bone at only one end.

LONG QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)
Q1. Explain the structure of bone.
Ans. See Q1. of theory.
Q2. Describe the structure of three types of cartilage.
Ans. See Q3. of theory.
Q3. Write the cause and symptoms of joint dislocation, spondylosis and sciatica.
Ans. See Q11. of theory.
Q4. Describe the types of arthritis, with their causes, symptoms and treatments.
Ans. See Q12. of theory.
Q5. Describe the three types of muscles.
Ans. See Q15. of theory.
Q6. Explain the ultrastructure of skeletal muscle.
Ans. See Q16. of theory.
Q7. Write a detailed note on the sliding filament model of muscle contraction.
Ans. See Q18. of theory.
Q8. Explain the action of antagonistic muscles in the movement of knee joint.
Ans. See Q19. of theory.
Q9. Draw a diagram of sarcomere and label its parts.
Ans. See Q16. of theory.
Q10. Describe causes and symptoms of muscle fatigue, cramps and tetany.
Ans. See Q20. of theory.
Q11. Justify how the main functions of the skeleton are to act as a system of rods and levers.
Ans. See Q21. of theory.
Q12. Justify why do the muscles pull but do not push.
Ans. See Q22. of theory.

INQUISITIVE QUESTIONS
Q1. Why is calcium essential for both the structural integrity of bones and the process of muscle contraction?
Ans. Role of Ca++ in bones
Calcium is the major component of hydroxyapatite (Ca₁₀(PO₄)₆(OH)₂), the mineralized matrix that gives bones, hardness and strength, without adequate calcium, bones become weak and porous, leading to increased risk of fractures.
Calcium is also critical in muscle contraction, by binding to TnC of Troponin of thin filaments to initiate muscle contraction by excitation contraction-coupling process. Low levels of calcium in blood (hypocalcaemia) leads to tetany (a muscular disorder).
Q2. Why is the human skeleton designed with both rigid bones and flexible joints instead of being made of a single solid structure?
Ans. The rigid bones provide the body with strength, support and protection while the joints are compulsory in the sense that primarily they are involved in mobility flexibility.

--- Page 15 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

shock absorbance, reducing energy cost while moving. If our skeleton were a single solid
structure, we couldn't have movements alongwith higher risks for fractures.
Q3. Why do muscles always work in pairs (antagonistic muscles) rather than alone?
Ans. Muscles can't push, they can only pull producing contraction, therefore they must
have to work in opposing pairs to enable controlled movements like extension and flexion. If
an arm needs to bend at elbow joint, biceps will contract, to straighten the arm there must be
a muscle (in this case triceps brachii) to pull in opposite direction. So that's why most of our
muscles work in pair with the exception of orbicularis on present around the mouth, which
contracts alone rather than in pairs.
Q4. Why does prolonged inactivity or space travel leads to muscle atrophy and bone
weakening?
• Actually our muscles require mechanical load or stress to maintain its protein synthesis
if there is lack of regular stress and reduced newous stimulation, muscles start losing
their mass due to prolonged inactivity also in apace there is almost zero gravity, our
muscles do not work in the absence of gravity which leads to atrophy.
• Likewise bones also remodel and grow in response to stress so during longer periods of
inactivity leads to loss of Ca++ by kidneys which inturn weakens the bones and in space
travel under the effect of microgravity, there will be no stress on bones, body starts its
demineralization leading to weak bones.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch12 Short Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [13/36]: 11th Bio New Ch2 Long Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

                                 Unit 2: Bacteria and Viruses

                                      Long Questions

                                  DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONS

Q1. Comment about latest taxonomic status of bacteria.
Ans. Over the years many schemes have been proposed for classifying organisms into
kingdoms. The five-kingdom classification system, proposed by Robert H. Whittaker in
1969, is recommended in biology. This system classified the organisms in a comprehensive
way that reflects evolutionary history of organisms. According to this classification system,
all prokaryotes are included in a separate kingdom i.e., the kingdom Monera.
Reason for Creating Separate Classification for Prokaryote
In the last decade, molecular studies have highlighted serious flaws in the five- kingdom
classification system. In 1990, American microbiologist Carl Woese suggested that there
are two separate groups of prokaryotes i.e., Archaea and Bacteria. He classified living
organisms into three domains i.e., domain Archaea, domain Bacteria and domain Eukarya.
According to three-domain system, domain Archaea and domain Bacteria contain
prokaryotes but they differ in a number of features. e.g. cell membrane lipids, cell wall
composition, metabolic differences. Molecular evidence suggests that archaea are more
closely related to eukaryotes than to bacteria.
★ Robert H. Whittaker proposed the five kingdoms system of classification i.e. Monera,
Protista, Fungi, Plantae and Animalia. The first one includes prokaryotes and other four
include eukaryotes.
Most biologists favour replacing it with a new system, called three-domain system. It is
more aligned with the data gained from molecular studies.
Bacteria are the prokaryotes classified in the domain of their own, i.e., the domain Bacteria.
                                 STRUCTURE OF BACTERIA
Q2. Write composition of bacterial cell wall. Compare and contrast the cell
wall of gram positive and gram-negative bacteria.
Ans. Cell wall composition: It is a rigid wall around the plasma membrane of bacterial
cell. The major component of bacterial cell wall is a unique macromolecule, called
peptidoglycan or murein. It is composed of long glycan (polysaccharide) chain, cross-linked
with short peptide fragments. Its amount differs in different bacteria. Cell wall also contains
lipids, which are linked to peptidoglycan.
Gram's Staining
★ Sir Hans Christian Gram devised the technique of Gram's staining. Gram-positive
bacteria stain purple because they retain violet dye (CV-I complex) in their cell walls.
★ Note: All questions and paragraphs marked with a star ★ are explanations of the Box
Information provided in the textbook.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
Gram- negative bacteria do not retain violet dye (they retain safranin) and so they appear in
original (pink) colour.
Composition of cell wall: The composition of cell wall is quite different in Gram-positive
and Gram- negative bacteria.
Gram-Positive Bacteria: The cell wall of Gram-positive bacteria contains thick layer of
peptidoglycan and has less lipid content.
Gram-Negative Bacteria: The cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria has a thin layer of
peptidoglycan and more lipid content.
• They have an outer membrane made of lipopolysaccharides and lipoproteins. The
outer membrane makes Gram-negative bacteria resistant to many antibiotics.
• It contains a protein called porin, which acts like a pore for specific molecules. The cell
wall of Gram-negative bacteria has more periplasmic space (space between
peptidoglycan layer and cell membrane) than Gram- positive.

Lipopolysaccharide Porin
Outer
membrane
Peptidoglycan
Lipoprotein
Protein
Periplasmic space
Protein
Cell membrane
Gram-Positive Gram-Negative
Fig: Cell wall composition of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria

Characteristics Gram-Positive Gram-Negative
Number of major
layers One Two
Chemical make up
Peptidoglycan (50% of dry
weight in some bacterial cells),
Teichoic acid and lipoteichoic
acid
Lipids (1-4%)
Peptidoglycan (10% dry
weight of some bacterial cells),
Lipopolysaccharides and
Lipoproteins
Lipids (11-12%)
Overall thickness 20-80nm 8-11 nm
Outer membrane No Yes
Periplasmic space Present in some Present in all
Permeability More permeable Less permeable
Q3. Briefly describe the following bacterial cell structure.
(i) Cell membrane (ii) Cytoplasm and Genetic material
Ans. (i) Cell Membrane
• Location: Cell membrane or plasma membrane is present just beneath cell wall. It lies at
the outermost in bacteria that lack cell wall (e.g., Mycoplasmas and Spiroplasmas).
• Lack Sterols: The cell membrane of bacteria does not have sterols (e.g., cholesterol) in
its chemical makeup.

--- Page 3 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

*   Mesosomes: At some points, cell membrane invaginates and forms vesicles, tubules or
    lamellae in cytoplasm. These structures are known as mesosomes. These are involved in
    DNA replication, cell division and also serve as respiratory centres.
ii) Cytoplasm and Genetic Material
*   Composition: Cytoplasm contains dissolved substances and large structures such as
    nucleoid, ribosomes, and mesosomes.
*   Organelles: It lacks cytoskeleton and membrane-bounded organelles. Many ribosomes
    are freely dispersed in cytoplasmic matrix and some are loosely attached to plasma
    membrane. Bacterial ribosomes are smaller than eukaryotic (80s) ribosomes. Each
    ribosome sediments at 70S (larger subunit at 50S and smaller subunit at 30S).
*   Nucleoid and Genetic Material: Near the centre of cytoplasm, there is an irregular-
    shaped dense area i.e., nucleoid. It contains DNA. A bacterium possesses a single,
    circular, double stranded DNA. Bacterial DNA does not have attached histones. It is
    sometimes called the chromosome of bacterium.
*   Plasmids: Some bacteria have circular, double-stranded extra chromosomal DNA
    molecules, called plasmids. They are self-replicating and can replicate before or after
    cell division. They contain genes that enable bacteria for resistance against unfavourable
    conditions (e.g., antibiotics).

[Image: Diagram of a bacterium with labels: Capsule, Cell wall, Cell membrane, DNA, Pilus, Nucleoid (containing DNA), Cytoplasm, Ribosome, Mesosome, Plasmid, Flagellum. Caption: Fig: Structure of generalized bacterium]

★ Plasmids as Vectors
Plasmids also serve as important vectors, in genetic engineering. They are used to carry
selected genes to bacteria for cloning or for the synthesis of specific proteins.

[Image: Diagram of a plasmid map and a bacterial cell. Labels: 3' Primer site, Restriction site, Inserted gene, Restriction site, 5' Primer site, Origin of replication, Antibiotic resistant gene, Plasmid map, Selectable Marker, Promoter. Caption: Fig: Plasmid in bacterial cell]

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 4 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

ENDOSPORE FORMATION IN BACTERIA
Q4. State the formation of endospore in bacteria. / Explain the mechanism of
sporulation in bacteria.
Ans. Definition: Endospores are thick-walled, metabolically inactive (dormant) specialized
"resting" cells, which enable bacteria to survive, extended periods of harsh conditions.
Sporulation: The process by which bacteria make endospores, is called sporulation.
Mechanism of Spore formation/Sporulation
i. DNA Replication and Septum Formation: When a bacterium faces unfavourable
conditions, it replicates its DNA. Cell membrane makes a septum to isolate the new DNA
and a small portion of cytoplasm, then the cell membrane surrounds DNA, cytoplasm and
isolated membrane.
ii. Double Membrane Formation: Cell membrane again grows around the new DNA,
cytoplasm, and septum. In this way, the new DNA is surrounded by two membranes.
iii. Formation of New Peptidoglycan: The DNA of vegetative cell disintegrates and whole
cell begins to dehydrate. A new peptidoglycan layer forms between the membranes around
separated DNA and cytoplasm.

1 Septum separates
new DNA
Septum DNA (Chromosomes)
Cell wall 2 Cell membrane
Cell surrounds new DNA
membrane cytoplasm and isolate
membrane
New DNA
6 Endospore 3 Double
released membrane
forms around
new DNA
and cytoplasm
4 Cell wall forms
5 spore coat forms between two
around spore membranes
Fig: Process of endospore formation (Sporulation) in bacteria

iv. Spore Coat Formation and Endospore Release: A spore coat also forms around it. The
structure matures into endospore. The vegetative cell breaks and endospore is released.
Endospore remains dormant unless favourable conditions return.
v. Endospore Germination: Under favourable conditions, endospore germinates to give
rise to a new vegetative cell.
Examples: Endospore formation is common in Gram-positive bacteria like Bacillus and
Clostridium.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 5 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

MOTILITY IN BACTERIA
Q5. Explain different methods of movement/locomotion in bacteria.
Ans. Bacteria use different motility patterns to navigate and explore natural habitats.
Following are some important methods of locomotion in bacteria.
a. Flagellar movements: The process of locomotion powered by flagella is called
flagellar movement, it may be swimming or swarming. Counter clockwise rotation of
flagellum pushes the cell forward with flagellum trailing behind.
Swimming: Swimming refers to the movement of
individual bacteria in liquid environment. They swim
by using their flagella, most bacilli and spirilla move by
means of of flagella.
Swarming: The coordinated movement of a group /
population of bacteria is called swarming. Flagellar
movement allows bacteria to travel in liquid media.
b. Twitching or crawling: It is used to move over
surfaces. It is mediated by pili, which bind to
surrounding solid surface and retract. Thus, bacterial
cell is pulled forward.
c. Gliding: In gliding, bacteria secrete slimy
substance, which help them for smooth gliding over
solid surfaces. It is similar to twitching.
d. Sliding: The movement due to the expansion
created by the pushing force of dividing cells.
e. Brownian movement: Some bacteria (e.g.,
Streptococcus) that do not have flagella or pili, move
due to the random and uncontrolled movements of the particles present in fluid is called
Brownian movement.
f. Movement by axial filament: Some bacteria (e.g., spirochaetes), have a modified
flagellum. It is known as axial filament.

Swimming

Swarming

Twitching

Pilus retracts

Gliding

Slimy substance

Sliding

Protoplasmic cylinder
Periplasm
Outer membrane
Flagellum

Flagellum
Fig: Axial filament in a spirochaete

It is anchored at one end and runs length-wise in periplasmic space (between cell membrane
and outer membrane). It consists of two sets of flagella-like fibrils anchored at the two poles
of cell. It helps spirochaetes for flexing, swimming, creeping and spinning movements.

REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 6 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

FLAGELLA
Q6. Explain the structure of bacterial flagellum. Classify bacteria on basis of
flagella.
Ans. Structure of Flagellum
• The flagellum of bacteria is entirely different in structure from the flagellum of
eukaryotes. They are not built on 9+2 pattern of microtubules, but are composed of
flagellin protein.
• The bacterial flagellum consists of a basal body, a hook and a filament.
i. Basal Body: The basal body is present just beneath cell membrane. It consists of
rotating rings (one pair in Gram-positive bacteria and two pairs in Gram-negative bacteria).
The rings anchor the flagellum in cell membrane and cell wall.
ii. Hook: The hook is a curved structure that connects basal body with the filament.
iii. Filament: Filament is elongated thread like structure composed of flagellin protein
sub-units in helical fashion.

Filament
Basal
body
Parts of flagellum in
Gram-positive bacteria
Cell
wall
Cell
membrane
Outer
membrane
Basal
body
Filament
Hook
Parts of flagellum in
Gram-negative bacteria
Fig: Structure of bacterial flagella

★ Pili in Bacteria: Some bacteria have pili (singular; pilus). These are non-helical,
filamentous appendages and are smaller and thinner than flagella. Pili are used for
attachment of bacteria to various surfaces.
They are also involved in the mating process
(conjugation) between cells.
Classification of Bacteria on Basis of Flagella
The primary function of flagella is to provide
locomotion to bacteria. Many kinds of bacteria
have flagella, which enable them to move.
• The secondary function of flagella is to
detect and respond to chemical signals
(chemotaxis).
1. Atrichous: The bacteria which do not
possess flagella are called atrichous.
2. Monotrichous: The bacteria with single
polar flagellum are called monotrichous.
3. Lophotrichous: The bacteria with a tuft of
flagella at one pole are called lophotrichous.
4. Amphitrichous: The bacteria with tuft of

Atrichous
Monotrichous
Lophotrichous
Amphitrichous
Peritrichous
Fig: The different arrangements of
bacterial flagella

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 7 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

flagella at each of two poles are called amphitrichous.
5. Peritrichous: The bacteria with flagella surrounding the whole cell are called peritrichous.
BACTERIA; ECOLOGY AND DIVERSITY
Q7. Elaborate major groups of domain bacteria.
Ans. Important groups of the domain bacteria
Margulis and Schwartz proposed a useful classification system for all prokaryotes. They
classified bacteria into 16 phyla. The following discussion deals with the important groups
of the domain bacteria.
1. Omnibacteria
• These are rigid, rod-shaped, heterotrophic, Gram-negative bacteria.
• Many important pathogens are included in this group. Most of these bacteria have flagella.
• They do not produce spores. They are usually aerobic.
• Examples: Escherichia coli and Vibrios.
2. Cyanobacteria
• These are photosynthetic bacteria.
• They played most important role in the
history of the Earth for increasing free
oxygen in atmosphere.
• They contain chlorophyll-a and accessory
pigments like carotenoids, and blue and
red phycobilins.
• Many cyanobacteria fix atmospheric
nitrogen in their special cells called
heterocysts. They are common in soil in the
form of mats. The mats on the sediments in
the sea are dominated by cyanobacteria.
• Cyanobacteria containing lichens are found
on rock surfaces.
★ In the recent discovery that the bulk of our
modern petroleum deposits were formed
by masses of decayed cyanobacteria.
★ Colourful blooms may occur in polluted
water as a result of the rampant growth of
cyanobacteria. The colours of such blooms
result from the photosynthetic pigments of
cyanobacteria.
3. Mycoplasmas and Spiroplasmas
• These groups differ from all other bacteria in
that they lack cell walls.
• As they lack cell walls, they are resistant to penicillin and other antibiotics that work by
inhibiting cell wall growth.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 8 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

• Some mycoplasmas cause diseases in mammals e.g., certain types of pneumonia in
humans.
• Spiroplasmas cause significant plant diseases e.g., the lethal yellowing disease of
coconuts.
4. Spirochaetes
• These are long spirilla with Gram-negative cell walls.
• They may have 2 to more than 100 flagella.
• Treponema are important spirochaetes. They cause syphilis (a fatal sexually transmitted
disease).
5. Pseudomonas
• These are straight or curved Gram-negative rods with one or many flagella at one end.
• They are found in soil and water. They can easily break down organic compounds.
• Some of them are autotrophic but many are plant pathogens.
• Some of them play role in denitrification. Pseudomonas aeruginosa occurs in soil,
water and raw vegetables.
• Although it is usually harmless, it can form serious infections in weak people.
6. Actinomycetes
• These have filamentous growth forms. They produce spores that are resistant to
unfavourable conditions.
• Some actinomycetes are nitrogen fixers and are found in the root nodules of many
flowering plants.
• Some actinomycetes are responsible for dental plaque, in which the enamel of teeth is destroyed.
• A member of this group i.e., Mycobacterium leprae causes leprosy.
• Another member i.e., Mycobacterium tuberculosis is the cause of tuberculosis.
• Many antibiotics e.g., tetracycline, chloramphenicol, erythromycin, and neomycin were
derived originally from actinomycetes.
7. Nitrogen -fixing aerobic bacteria
• This group includes economically important bacteria.
• They are Gram- negative and most are flagellated.
• Azotobacter is a member of this group. It is found in soil and water and converts
atmospheric nitrogen into nitrates.
8. Chemosynthetic bacteria (chemoautotrophs)
• These bacteria derive energy from the oxidation of inorganic compounds of nitrogen,
sulphur and iron. They use this energy for the synthesis of their food.
• Nitrosomonas and Nitrobacter are included in this group. They oxidize nitrogen
compounds (NH3) to gain energy.
• The NH3 is in turn converted to nitrite and nitrate. Thus, they play vital role in nitrogen cycle.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 9 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

IMPORTANCE OF BACTERIA
Q8. Briefly describe the economical and ecological importance of bacteria.
Ans. Among the great diversity of bacteria, many bacteria are beneficial ecologically as
well as economically.
a. Ecologically Important Bacteria
1. Recyclers of Nature
Bacteria are involved in almost all biogeochemical cycles in which different essential
elements move to and fro between organisms and environment.
• Nitrifying bacteria (Nitrosomonas, Nitrobacter and Azotobacter) and denitrifying
bacteria (Pseudomonas) play significant role in the completion of nitrogen cycle.
• Decomposer bacteria decompose dead organic matter and play key role in carbon-
hydrogen-oxygen cycle. The activities of photosynthetic bacteria e.g., cyanobacteria
play role in the increase of free oxygen in Earth’s atmosphere.
2. Environmental Cleaners
Many bacteria can degrade organic compounds very easily. Such bacteria have been used
for the removal or degradation of pollutants (bioremediation) from environment.
For example, bacteria are used to decompose city sewage into harmless products. Some
bacteria can digest the hydrocarbons present in petroleum. These bacteria are used to clean
up oil spills. Bacteria are also used for the bioremediation of industrial toxic wastes.
b. Economically important bacteria
1. Makers of useful products
Fermented Food: Many bacteria e.g., Lactobacillus in combination with yeasts and molds,
have been used for thousands of years in the preparation of fermented foods such as cheese,
pickles, soy sauce, vinegar, wine and yogurt.
Pharmaceutical and Agrochemical industry: In pharmaceutical and agrochemical
industry, bacteria are most important in the production of important chemicals. Some
bacteria are used for the production of antibiotics.
Commercial preparation of animals’ skin for making leather goods, involves the use of
bacteria.
2. As biopesticides
Biological Pest Control: Bacteria are used in the place of pesticides in biological pest
control.
Example: This commonly involves Bacillus thuringiensis, a Gram-positive, soil dwelling
bacterium. These biopesticides are environmental friendly and have little or no effect on
humans, wildlife, pollinators and most other beneficial insects.
Q9. Explain the use of bacteria in research and technology.
Ans. Determine the Function of Genes and Enzymes
Bacteria can grow quickly and scientists can manipulate with them very easily. Due to these
reasons, bacteria are used in the fields of molecular biology, genetics and biochemistry.
Scientists make mutations in bacterial DNA and examine the changes in characteristics. In

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 10 ---
this way. they determine the function of genes and enzymes in bacteria. This knowledge is
then applied to study the same genes and enzymes in more complex organisms.
Human Genes in Bacteria: Scientists also insert human genes in bacterial plasmids to
produce therapeutic proteins e.g., insulin, growth hormones, or antibodies.
NORMAL FLORA
Q10. Define normal flora. State the benefits which we get from normal
bacterial flora.
Ans. Definition: The mixture of organisms regularly found at any anatomical site is
referred to as the normal flora.
Description: In a healthy animal, the internal tissues, e.g., blood, brain, muscle, etc., are
normally free of microorganisms.
• On the other hand, the surface tissues, e.g., skin and mucous membranes, are
constantly in contact with environment and are colonized by certain microbial species.
The normal flora of humans consists of bacteria, a few fungi and protists, and some
methanogenic archaea. Bacteria are the most numerous and obvious microbial
components of normal flora.
Benefits to normal flora
• The associations between humans and their normal flora are mutualistic.
• In human body, normal flora gets nutrients, a stable environment and constant
temperature, protection, and transport.
Benefits to Humans
• Similarly, body also gets many benefits from normal bacteria. For example;
i. Synthesis of vitamins: Bacteria in alimentary canal produce vitamins. They excrete
vitamins which are in excess of their needs. From alimentary canal, these vitamins are
absorbed and distributed in body. For example, enteric bacteria secrete Vitamin K and
Vitamin B12, and lactic acid bacteria produce B-vitamins.
ii. Prevent colonization by pathogens: The bacteria of normal flora compete with
pathogens for attachment sites and nutrients. So, pathogens have less chance of entering
body tissues.
iii. Inhibit or kill pathogens: The intestinal bacteria produce a variety of substances, which
inhibit or kill pathogen bacteria.
iv. Stimulates the production of cross-reactive antibodies: Since the normal flora
behaves as antigens, they induce immunological response. Low levels of antibodies
produced against the normal flora are known to cross-react with certain pathogens, and
thereby prevent infection or invasion.
VIRUS
Q11. Explain the structure and shapes of viruses.
Ans. Structure of Virus: Viruses are extremely small infectious agents and can only be
seen under electron microscope.
Size: They range in size from 20 nm (parvovirus) to 250 nm (pox viruses). They are 10 to
1000 times smaller than most bacteria. That is why, they can pass through the pores of filter paper.
Genome: The central core of a virus is its genome. It is made up of nucleic acid (either
DNA or RNA).

--- Page 11 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Capsid and Capsomers: The core is surrounded by a protein coat, called capsid. It gives
definite shape to virus. Capsid is made up of protein subunits called as capsomeres. The
number and kind of capsomeres is characteristic of a particular virus.
★ Herpes virus contains 162 capsomeres in its capsid (causes cold sores, chickenpox etc.)
★ Adenovirus contains 252 capsomeres in its capsid (causes common cold).
Nucleocapsid: Central core and capsid are collectively called as nucleocapsid.

Helical          Icosahedral        Complex        Enveloped      Non.enveloped
                                Fig: Diversity in virus's shapes
Envelope: It is a lipid-rich membrane and is derived from host cell.
Enveloped viruses: In some animal viruses, nucleocapsid is covered by another membrane
called envelope.
Naked viruses: Non enveloped viruses are known as naked-viruses.
General appearance: There is a great diversity in the general appearance of viruses.
Animal and Plant Viruses: The animal and plant viruses may be polyhedron (having
many sides) or helical.
Bacterial Viruses: The bacterial viruses (bacteriophages) may be cubical, icosahedral
(having 20 faces), helical, or complex (polyhedral head and rod-shaped tail).
Q12. Explain the structure of a model bacteriophage.
Ans. Bacteriophages
Bacteriophages are a diverse group of viruses that
attack bacteria. They are among the most
complex viruses. The best known phages of
Escherichia coli are T-phages. There are many
varieties of T-phages.
Structure of T4 phage
A T4 phage consists of a head and a tail.
i.) Head: The head is an elongated pyramidal
(with two triangles having a common base),
hexagonal (six sided), prism-shaped structure.
Capsid and Core: Its capsid is made of proteins
while core contains a long double stranded DNA.
A straight tail is attached with head.
ii.) Tail: The tail is also made of inner core and
outer sheath, both of which are made of different

                                                                Capsid
                                                                Core (DNA)
                                                                Neck
                                                                Sheath
                                                                Tail core
                                                                Tail fiber
                                                                End plate
                                                                Pin
                                                                Fig: Structure of a bacteriophage

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 12 ---
proteins. A neck attaches sheath with head and an end plate is present on the other side of
sheath. Six tail fibres are attached with end plate. They help the phage to attach with
bacterial wall. These structures are also made of proteins.
Q13. Explain the structure of HIV.
Ans. Structure of HIV: Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) belongs to the group
called retroviruses. It is a special group of animal viruses. Retroviruses contain RNA and
their capsids.
Envelope: These structures are surrounded by lipid
rich envelops. The envelope also comprising
glycoproteins spikes, which help the virus identify
and bind to its target. They are spherical in form
and are about 100 nm in diameter.
Reverse transcriptase:
The most distinguishing character of retroviruses is
the presence of a specific enzyme, reverse
transcriptase.
This enzyme catalyses the process of reverse
transcription in which a single stranded RNA is
reversely transcribed into a strand of DNA. The enzyme then uses DNA strand to complete a
double helix of DNA.
Q14. How possibly HIV got entry to humans? Relate its discovery with AIDS.

Ans. ★ Possible Origin of HIV: Experts have concluded that HIV originated in the
jungles of Africa among wild chimps. Evidence suggests that a form of this virus entered
human species and became HIV by way of monkey bites or ingesting monkey meat and
brains.
AIDS: HIV is responsible for the disease AIDS (Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome).
AIDS weakens the immune system of patient. The disease is fatal because no one can
survive without immune system to defend against other viral and bacterial infections
(opportunistic infections).
Discovery: The disease was first reported in 1981 and the patients were found homosexual.
Later on, AIDS was discovered in non-homosexual patients too who had received blood or
blood products from other AIDS patients.
In 1984, it was discovered that the agent causing AIDS was a virus. In 1986, the AIDS
causing virus was given the name Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). It is a host
specific virus. It can multiply in monkeys but do not cause AIDS in them.
Because HIV attaches to human cells using specific binding factor known as CD4 receptor
which are not present in monkeys.

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch2 Long Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [14/36]: 11th Bio New Ch2 MCQ's.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
1. Which of the following component is
not found in all kinds of bacteria?
(a) Ribosomes (b) Cell membrane
(c) Nucleoid (d) Capsule
2. The bacterial chromosome is typically:
(a) Linear, double-stranded DNA
(b) Circular, single-stranded RNA
(c) Circular, double-stranded DNA
(d) Linear, single-stranded DNA
3. In bacterial cells, respiration occurs at:
(a) Mitochondria
(b) Cell membrane
(c) Ribosomes
(d) Endoplasmic reticulum
4. Which group of bacteria is known
as a good source of antibiotics?
(a) Omnibacteria (b) Spirochaetes
(c) Pseudomonas (d) Actinomycetes
5. What is the primary function of
flagella in bacterial cells?
(a) DNA replication (b) Cell division
(c) Motility
(d) Protein synthesis

6. Which type of motility in bacteria
is mediated by pili?
(a) Brownian movement
(b) Gliding motility
(c) Twitching motility
(d) Swarming motility
7. Which of the following bacterial
structures is responsible for detecting
and responding to chemicals?
(a) Capsule (b) Pili
(c) Flagella (d) Ribosomes
8. Which one of the following is not
Nitrifying bacteria?
(a) Nitrosomonas (b) Nitrobacter
(c) Azotobacter (d) Pseudomonas
9. The enzyme responsible for converting
HIV RNA into DNA is:
(a) RNA polymerase
(b) Reverse transcriptase
(c) DNA helicase (d) Integrase
10. The HIV capsid contains:
(a) Single-stranded DNA and reverse
transcriptase
(b) Single-stranded RNA and reverse
transcriptase
(c) Double-stranded DNA and integrase
(d) Double-stranded RNA and RNA
polymerase

SLO BASED MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
Structure of Bacteria
11. The major component of bacterial cell
wall is:
(a) Peptidoglycan (b) Lecithin
(c) Disaccharides (d) All of above
12. The cell wall of Gram-positive and
gram-negative bacteria differs in:
(a) Gram positive contain thin layer of
peptidoglycan
(b) Gram negative contain less-lipid content
(c) Gram negative contain lesser periplasmic
space
(d) Gram positive contain thick layer of
peptidoglycan and less lipid content
13. Gram-positive bacteria stain purple
because they retain:
(a) Secondary dye (b) Violet dye
(c) Safranin (d) Alcohol
14. Which bacteria possess pore made up
of porin protein, for specific
molecules?
(a) Gram positive (b) Gram negative
(c) Both (a) and (b) (d) None of them

--- Page 2 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

15. At some points, bacterial cell
membrane invaginates to form
vesicles, tubules or lamellae in
cytoplasm, these structures are
known as:
(a) Ribosomes (b) Endosomes
(c) Mesosomes (d) Peroxisomes
16. Which of the following is not the
function of mesosomes?
(a) Adhesion (b) DNA replication
(c) Cell division (d) Respiration
17. Chromosome of bacteria differs
from eukaryotic chromosomes in:
(a) Have nucleosome
(b) Have histones
(c) Lack histones
(d) Bounded by membrane
18. Circular, double-stranded, extra-
chromosomal DNA in bacteria is
called:
(a) Genomic DNA
(b) Chromosomal DNA
(c) Episome
(d) Plasmid
19. Plasmids are used to carry gene of
interest for the synthesis of
specific:
(a) Polysaccharides (b) Proteins
(c) Nucleic acids (d) Lipids
20. The structure in bacteria, that enable
them to resist against antibiotics:
(a) Plasmids (b) Ribosomes
(c) Cell wall (d) Cell membrane
21. Smaller subunit of bacterial
ribosome sediments at:
(a) 70S (b) 50S
(c) 80S (d) 30S
22. Many bacteria can survive extended
periods of harsh conditions by
forming specialized cells called:
(a) Exospores (b) Endospores
(c) Microspores (d) Megaspores

23. The process by which bacteria
make endospores is called:
(a) Sporulation (b) Fragmentation
(c) Sporogony (d) Lysis
Motility in Bacteria
24. When a bacterial population moves
together by means of flagella, it is
called:
(a) Twitching (b) Crawling
(c) Brownian movement (d) Swarming
25. Counter-clockwise rotation of
flagellum pushes the cell:
(a) Forward (b) Backward
(c) Medially (d) Laterally
26. Which of the following is similar to
twitching movements?
(a) Gliding (b) Crawling
(c) Brownian movement (d) Swarming
27. The movement used to move over
surfaces mediated by pili is called:
(a) Crawling
(b) Twitching
(c) Both (a) and (b)
(d) Flagella movement
28. The type of movement in bacteria
which is due to expansion created by
pushing force of dividing cells is:
(a) Gliding (b) Twitching
(c) Sliding (d) Swarming
29. Spirochetes move by:
(a) Flexing
(b) Axial filament
(c) Modified flagellum
(d) All of above
30. Identify movement:
(a) Flagella movement
(b) Swarming
(c) Sliding
(d) Twitching

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 3 ---
31. Identify movement:
Sliding
(a) Swimming (b) Swarming
(c) Sliding (d) Gliding
32. Identify bacteria:
(a) Atrichous (b) Monotrichous
(c) Peritrichous (d) Lophotrichous
33. The bacteria with tuft of flagella at
both poles is:
(a) Atrichous (b) Peritrichous
(c) Amphitrichous (d) Lophotrichous
34. Basal body consisting of (one pair)
of rotating rings is found in:
(a) Gram negative
(b) Gram positive
(c) Both (a) and (b)
(d) None of them
35. The structure which connects basal
body with filament, in bacteria is:
(a) Pilus (b) Rotating ring
(c) Plasmid (d) Hook
Bacteria; Ecology and Diversity
36. The fossil record of prokaryotes
shows that archea and bacteria
were abundant ……… years ago:
(a) 2.5 billion (b) 3.5 billion
(c) 3.5 million (d) 1.5 billion
37. Margulis and Schwartz classified
bacteria into ……… phyla:
(a) 27 (b) 8
(c) 16 (d) 5
38. Escherichia coli belongs to:
(a) Omnibacteria (b) Cyanobacteria
(c) Spirochetes (d) Spiroplasmas

39. The group of bacteria which played
most important role in history of
the Earth for increasing free
oxygen in atmosphere:
(a) Mycoplasmas (b) Spiroplasmas
(c) Pseudomonas (d) Cyanobacteria
40. The mats on the sediments in the
sea are dominated by:
(a) Pseudomonas
(b) Cyanobacteria
(c) Actinomycetes
(d) Chemosynthetic bacteria
41. Group of bacteria which lack cell
wall resistant to penicillin are:
(a) Mycoplasmas (b) Spiroplasmas
(c) Spirochetes (d) Both (a) and (b)
42. Many cyanobacteria fix atmospheric
nitrogen in their special cells called:
(a) Akinities (b) Hormogonia
(c) Heterocysts (d) Resting spore
43. Which bacterial group possess 2 to
more than 100 flagella?
(a) Spirochetes (b) E.coli
(c) Cyanobacteria (d) Pseudomonas
44. Azotobacter belongs to:
(a) Chemosynthetic bacteria
(b) Actinomycetes
(c) N2-fixing bacteria
(d) Omnibacter
★45. About ……… new antibiotics
from actinomycetes are being
discovered each year.
(a) 15 (b) 100
(c) 150 (d) 180
46. Bacillus thuringiensis is Gram
……… soil dwelling bacterium,
commonly used as ………
(a) Negative, recycler
(b) Positive, biopesticide
(c) Negative, biopesticide
(d) Positive, recycler

--- Page 4 ---
47. Which of the following is nitrifying
bacteria?
(a) Azotobacter (b) Pseudomonas
(c) E.coli (d) Treponema
Normal Flora
48. Which of the following is not
included in normal flora of humans?
(a) Bacteria (b) Fungi
(c) Protists (d) Plants
49. The most likely organ to, get
colonized by microbial species is:
(a) Skin (b) Heart
(c) Brain (d) Blood
50. Enteric bacteria secrete:
(a) Vitamin K & B12
(b) Vitamin B6 & C
(c) only Vitamin K
(d) All of above
Virus
51. Size range of viruses is from 20 nm
to:
(a) 250μm (b) 350μm
(c) 250 nm (d) 600μm
52. The largest size viruses are:
(a) Parvoviruses (b) Pox viruses
(c) Adenoviruses (d) Herpes viruses
53. Viruses can pass through filter
paper because they are.........
times smaller to bacteria:
(a) 100 to 10,000 (b) 10 to 100
(c) 10 to 1000 (d) 1 to 10,000
54. Bacterial viruses (bacteriophages) may
be icosahedral which means having:
(a) 10 faces (b) 15 faces
(c) 20 faces (d) 100 faces
55. Number of capsomeres in virus
causing common cold are:
(a) 152 (b) 252
(c) 162 (d) 262

56. The best known phages of E.coli
are:
(a) P-phages (b) R-phages
(c) S-phages (d) T-phages
57. How many tail fibres are attached
with end plate of a bacteriophage:
(a) 2 (b) 4
(c) 6 (d) 8
58. The spikes of HIV are made up of:
(a) Glycolipids (b) Glycoproteins
(c) Nucleoproteins (d) Lipoproteins
59. The average diameter of HIV is
about:
(a) 250 nm (b) 180 nm
(c) 100 nm (d) 10 nm
60. The most distinguishing character of
retroviruses is the presence of enzyme:
(a) DNA polymerase
(b) Restriction endonuclease
(c) DNAase
(d) Reverse transcriptase
61. The AIDS causing virus was given
name of Human Immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) in:
(a) 1984 (b) 1896
(c) 1986 (d) 2001
62. Experts have concluded that HIV
originated in the jungles of Africa
among wild:
(a) Chimps (b) Cats
(c) Beasts (d) Elephants
63. Bacteria whose genome has DNA of
some other organism is called:
(a) Pathogenic bacteria
(b) Mutagenic bacteria
(c) Methanogenic bacteria
(d) Transgenic bacteria
64. Which is not true about shape of
the head of bacteriophages?
(a) Two triangles having a common base
(b) Prism shaped
(c) Octagonal
(d) Elongated

--- Page 5 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

ANSWER KEY
1. d 2. c 3. b 4. d 5. c 6. c 7. c 8. d
9. b 10. b 11. a 12. d 13. b 14. b 15. c 16. a
17. c 18. d 19. b 20. a 21. d 22. b 23. a 24. d
25. a 26. a 27. c 28. c 29. d 30. b 31. c 32. d
33. c 34. b 35. d 36. b 37. c 38. a 39. d 40. b
41. d 42. c 43. a 44. c 45. c 46. b 47. a 48. d
49. a 50. a 51. c 52. b 53. c 54. c 55. b 56. d
57. c 58. b 59. c 60. d 61. c 62. a 63. d 64. c

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch2 MCQ's.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [15/36]: 11th Bio New Ch2 Short Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 2: Bacteria and Viruses

Short Questions

SHORT QUESTION ANSWERS (EXERCISE)

Q1. Write about the structural
components of a bacterial cell wall and
their arrangement.
Ans. Bacterial cell wall
It is a rigid wall around the plasma
membrane of bacterial cell. The major
component of bacterial cell wall is a unique
macromolecule, called peptidoglycan or
murein. It is composed of long glycan
(polysaccharide) chain, cross-linked with
short peptide fragments. Its amount differs
in different bacteria. Cell wall also contains
lipids, which are linked to peptidoglycan.
Q2. Write the composition of the
peptidoglycan layer in bacterial cell
walls.
Ans. Peptidoglycan layer of Bacterial cell wall
The composition of cell wall is quite
different in Gram-positive and Gram-
negative bacteria. The cell wall of Gram-
positive bacteria contains thick layer of
peptidoglycan and has less lipid content.
While the cell wall of Gram-negative
bacteria has a thin layer of peptidoglycan
and more lipid content.
Lipopolysaccharide Porin
Outer
membrane
Peptidoglycan
Lipoprotein
Protein
Periplasmic space
Protein
Cell membrane
Gram-Positive Gram-Negative
Cell wall composition of Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacteria

Q3. What are mesosomes? What are
their functions?
Ans. Mesosomes
In bacteria at some points, cell membrane
invaginates and forms vesicles, tubules or
lamellae in cytoplasm. These structures are
known as mesosomes. These are involved in
DNA replication, cell division and also
serve as respiratory centres.
Q4. How can plasmids be used in
genetic engineering?
Ans. Plasmids in genetic engineering
Plasmids serve as important vectors, in
genetic engineering. They are used to carry
selected genes to bacteria for cloning or for
the synthesis of specific proteins. Scientists
also insert human genes in bacteria and
produce therapeutic proteins e.g., insulin,
growth hormones or antibodies.
Q5. Define sporulation.
Ans. Sporulation
The process by which bacteria make
endospores, is called sporulation. Endospore
remains dormant unless favourable conditions
return. Under favourable conditions, endospore
germinates to give rise to a new vegetative cell.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
Q6. What is the function of the
bacterial capsule?
Ans. Function of capsule
Some bacteria produce capsule outside their
cell walls. It is a gelatinous layer and gives
sticky characters to bacterial colonies.
It provides protection from phagocytosis,
prevent desiccation and adherence to
surfaces.
Q7. Write the role of pili in bacterial
cells. How do they differ from flagella?

Ans. Role of pili
Some bacteria have pili (singular; pilus). These
are non-helical, filamentous appendages and
are smaller and thinner than flagella.
• Pili are used for attachment of bacteria to
various surfaces.
• They are also involved in the mating
process (conjugation) between cells to
exchange genetic material. Flagella enable
bacteria to move to detect and to respond to
chemical signals.
Q8. What are plasmids, and how do
they contribute to enabling bacteria to
resistance against unfavorable conditions?

Ans. Plasmids
Some bacteria have circular, double-
stranded extra chromosomal DNA
molecules, called plasmids. They are self-
replicating and can replicate before or after
division. They contain genes that enable
bacteria for resistance against unfavourable
conditions (e.g., antibiotics).

Q9. Write about the role of
endospores in bacterial survival.

Ans. Role of Endospores
Many bacteria can survive extended periods of
harsh conditions by forming specialized
"resting" cells, called endospores.
Endospores are thick-walled and
metabolically inactive (dormant). The process
by which bacteria make endospores, is called
sporulation. Endospore remains dormant
unless favourable conditions return. Under
favourable conditions, endospore germinates
to give rise to a new vegetative cell.
Q10. What is the significance of
lipopolysaccharides and lipoproteins in
Gram-negative bacteria?
Ans. Significance
The cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria
has an outer membrane made of
lipopolysaccharides and lipoproteins. The
outer membrane makes Gram-negative
bacteria resistant to many antibiotics. It
contains a protein called porin, which acts
like a pore for specific molecules.
Q11. How do spirochetes achieve motility?

Ans. Motility in Spirochete
Spirochaetes have a modified flagellum. It
is known as axial filament. It is anchored at
one end and runs length-wise in periplasmic
space (between cell membrane and outer
membrane). It consists of two sets of
flagella-like fibrils anchored at the two poles
of cell. It helps spirochaetes for flexing,
swimming, creeping and spinning
movements.

--- Page 3 ---
Q12. Differentiate between twitching and gliding movements in bacterial
motility.
Ans.
Twitching
• It is a type of movement in bacteria,
that enable them to move over surfaces.
• It is mediated by pili, which bind to
surrounding solid surface and retract. Thus,
bacterial cell is pulled forward.
Twitching
Pilus retracts
Gliding
• It is similar to twitching.
• In gliding, bacteria secrete slimy
substance, which help them for smooth
gliding over solid surfaces.
Gliding
Slimy substance
Q13. How do bacteria without
flagella can achieve motility?
Ans. Brownian movement
Some bacteria (e.g., Streptococcus) that do
not have flagella or pili, move due to the
random and uncontrolled movements of the
particles present in fluid which is called
Brownian movement.
Gliding: It is similar to twitching. In
gliding, bacteria secrete slimy substance,
which help them for smooth gliding over
solid surfaces.
Sliding: It is due to the expansion created by
the pushing force of dividing cells.
Q14. What is the difference between swimming motility and swarming motility
in bacteria?
Ans.
Swimming Motility
Swimming refers to the movement of
individual bacteria in liquid environment.
They swim by using their flagella, most
bacilli and spirilla move by means of
flagella.
Swimming
Swarming Motility
The coordinated movement of a group /
population of bacteria is called swarming.
Swarming

--- Page 4 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

SLO BASED SHORT QUESTION ANSWERS
Structure of Bacteria
Q15. Discuss the recent taxonomic
status of bacteria.
Ans. Taxonomic status of bacteria
According to five kingdom classification
system, proposed by Robert Whittaker all
prokaryotes are included in a separate
kingdom is kingdom Monera. But in the last
decade, molecular studies have highlighted
serious flaws in the five-kingdom
classification system. Now, most biologists
favour replacing it with a new system, called
three-domain system, which is more aligned
with the data gained from molecular studies.
In this new system, bacteria are the
prokaryotes classified in the domain of their
own, i.e. the domain bacteria.
Q16. What is periplasmic space. How
it differs in various bacteria?
Ans. Periplasmic space
The space between peptidoglycan layer and cell
membrane of bacteria is called periplasmic
space.
The cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria
has more periplasmic space than Gram
positive.
[Image of Gram-Positive and Gram-Negative cell wall structure]
Cell wall composition of Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacteria
Q17. Why Mycoplasmas and
Spiroplasmas are resistant to
penicillin?
Ans. Penicillin is an antibiotic that
works by inhibiting cell wall growth in
bacteria. There are two genera in bacteria
which lack cell wall, they are
Mycoplasmas and Spiroplasmas lack cell
walls so their outer membrane is cell
membrane that is why they are resistant
to penicillin.
Q18. How the cell membrane and
cytoplasm of bacteria is different from
eukaryotes?
Ans. Cell membrane of bacteria
The cell membrane of bacteria does not have
sterols (i.e. cholesterol) in its chemical
makeup while eukaryotic cell membranes
possess cholesterol in their lipid bilayer.
Cytoplasm of Bacteria
Bacterial cell lacks cytoskeleton, membrane-
bounded organelle and nucleus in their
cytoplasm. The only organelle they have is
ribosome but these are smaller than
eukaryotic ribosomes, while the cytoplasm
of eukaryotes contain cytoskeleton, all
membrane bounded organelles and nucleus.
Bacteria, Ecology and Diversity
Q19. For how long bacteria and
archaea are inhabiting earth? Where
are they found on Earth?
Ans. Habitat of Bacteria
The fossil record shows that prokaryotes i.e.,
archaea and bacteria were abundant 3.5 billion
years ago. They evolved and remained all alone
on Earth for the next 2 billion years. Today,
prokaryotes (archaea and bacteria) are found
wherever there is life. Bacteria are found in
water, air, soil, food and in the bodies of
animals and plants. They outnumber all
eukaryotes. They can survive in extreme habitats.
Q20. Name the major groups of
domain bacteria.
Ans. Major groups of bacteria
Followings are the major groups of bacteria:
(i) Omnibacteria (ii) Cyanobacteria
(iii) Mycoplasmas and Spiroplasmas
(iv) Spirochetes (v) Pseudomonas
(vi) Actinomycetes
(vii) Nitrogen fixing bacteria
(viii) Chemosynthetic bacteria

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 5 ---
Q21. Characterize Omnibacteria.
Ans. Characteristics
These are rigid, rod-shaped, heterotrophic,
Gram-negative bacteria. Many important
pathogens are included in this group. Most
of these bacteria have flagella. They do not
produce spores. They are usually aerobic.
Escherichia coli and vibrios are examples of
such bacteria.
Q22. Briefly describe major
characteristics of mycoplasmas and
Spiroplasmas. How they differ from
other bacteria?
Ans. Characteristics of mycoplasmas
and Spiroplasmas
• These groups differ from all other bacteria
in that they lack cell walls and that's why
they are the smallest bacteria. As they
lack cell walls, they are also resistant to
penicillin and other antibiotics that work
by inhibiting cell wall growth.
• Some mycoplasmas cause diseases in
mammals e.g., certain types of pneumonia
in humans.
• Spiroplasmas cause significant plant
diseases e.g., the lethal yellowing disease
of coconuts.
Q23. Differentiate between cyanobacteria and N2-fixing bacteria.
Ans.
Cyanobacteria
• These are photosynthetic bacteria.
• They contain chlorophyll-a and
accessory pigments like carotenoids,
and blue and red phycobilins.
• Many cyanobacteria fix atmospheric
nitrogen in their special cells called
heterocysts. They are common in soil in
the form of mats. The mats on the
sediments in the sea are dominated by
cyanobacteria.
N2-Fixing bacteria
• Nitrogen fixing bacteria are found in soil
and water and convert atmospheric
nitrogen into nitrates.
• This group includes economically
important bacteria.
• They are Gram-negative and most are
flagellated.
• Azotobacter is a member of this group.
Q24. Compare spirochetes with pseudomonas.
Ans.
Spirochaetes
• Spirochaetes are long spirilla with
Gram-negative cell walls.
• They may have 2 to more than 100
flagella.
• Treponema are important spirochaetes.
• They cause syphilis (a fatal sexually
transmitted disease).
Pseudomonas
• Pseudomonas are straight or curved
Gram-negative rods with one or many
flagella at one end.
• Some of them are autotrophic but many
are plant pathogens. Some of them play
role in denitrification.
• Pseudomonas aeruginosa occurs in soil,
water and raw vegetables, it can cause
serious infections in people with weak
immunity.

--- Page 6 ---
Q25. How chemosynthetic bacteria
derive energy for survival?
Ans. Energy for survival
Chemosynthetic bacteria derive energy from
the oxidation of inorganic compounds of
nitrogen, sulphur and iron.
They use this energy for the synthesis of
their food. Nitrosomonas and Nitrobacter
are included in this group. They oxidize
nitrogen compounds (NH3) to gain energy.
The NH3 is in turn converted to nitrite and
nitrate. Thus, they play vital role in
nitrogen cycle.
Q26. Name the group of bacteria which
are pathogenic and are also decomposers.

Ans. Following are the group of
bacteria which are pathogenic as well as
decomposers,
i. Omnibacteria ii. Spirochetes
iii. Pseudomonas
Q27. Name the group of bacteria
which are nitrogen fixers.
Ans. Following are the group of bacteria
which are Nitrogen fixers
i. Cyanobacteria ii. Actinomycetes
Q28. Which bacteria are responsible
for following diseases?
(i). Leprosy (ii) Tuberculosis
(iii) Syphilis
iv) Lethal yellowing disease of coconuts
Ans.
(i) Leprosy is caused by Mycobacterium
leprae.
(ii) Tuberculosis is caused by
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
(iii) Syphilis is caused by Treponema
pallidum.
(iv) Lethal Yellowing disease of coconuts is
caused by Spiroplasmas.
Q29. Name the antibiotic derived
from actinomycetes.
Ans.
Antibiotics
• Tetracycline
• Chloramphenicol
• Erythromycin
• Neomycin
Q30. Which bacteria play significant
roles in the completion of nitrogen-cycle?

Ans.
Nitrifying
Bacteria
Denitrifying
Bacteria
Nitrosomonas
Pseudomonas
Nitrobacter
Azotobacter

Importance of Bacteria
Q31. Some bacteria are titled as “The
makers of useful products” justify?

Ans. Makers of useful products
Many bacteria e.g., Lactobacillus in
combination with yeasts and molds, have
been used for thousands of years in the
preparation of fermented foods such as
cheese, pickles, soy sauce, vinegar, wine and
yogurt. In pharmaceutical and
agrochemical industry, bacteria are most
important in the production of important
chemicals. Some bacteria are used for the
production of antibiotics. Commercial
preparation of animals` skin for making
leather goods, involves the use of bacteria.
Q32. Describe the role of bacteria as
environmental cleaners.
Ans. Environmental cleaners
Many bacteria can degrade organic
compounds very easily. Such bacteria have
been used for the removal or degradation of
pollutants (bioremediation) from
environment.
• For example, bacteria are used to
decompose city sewage into harmless
products.
• Some bacteria can digest the
hydrocarbons present in petroleum. These
bacteria are used to clean up oil spills.
• Bacteria are also used for the
bioremediation of industrial toxic wastes.

--- Page 7 ---
Q33. Which bacteria are significant
in biological pest control? / Justify the
role of bacteria as biopesticides?

Ans. Biopesticides
Bacteria are used in the place of pesticides
in biological pest control. This commonly
involves Bacillus thuringiensis, a Gram-
positive, soil dwelling bacterium. These
biopesticides are environmental friendly and
have little or no effect on humans, wildlife,
pollinators and most other beneficial insects.
Q34. Which quality of bacteria
enables them to be selected for
biological research?
Ans. Quality of bacteria
Bacteria can grow quickly and scientists can
manipulate with them very easily e.g.,
Escherichia coli.
Due to these reasons, bacteria are used in the
fields of molecular biology, genetics and
biochemistry.
• Scientists make mutations in bacterial
DNA and examine the changes in
characteristics.
• In this way, they determine the function
of genes and enzymes in bacteria.
• This knowledge is then applied to study
the same genes and enzymes in more
complex organisms. Scientists also insert
human genes in bacteria and produce
therapeutic proteins e.g., insulin, growth
hormones, or antibodies.
Normal Flora
Q35. Define normal flora. Which
organisms make humans normal flora?

Ans. Normal Flora
• The mixture of organisms regularly found
at any anatomical site is referred to as the
normal flora.
• In a healthy animal, the internal tissues,
e.g., blood, brain, muscle, etc., are
normally free of microorganisms. On the
other hand, the surface tissues, e.g., skin
and mucous membranes, are constantly in
contact with environment and are
colonized by certain microbial species.
• The normal flora of humans consists of
bacteria, few fungi, protists, and some
methanogenic archaea. Bacteria are the
most numerous and obvious microbial
components of normal flora.
Q36. Humans and their normal flora
are mutualistic comment.
Ans. Benefits of Bacterial Flora of
Humans
The associations between humans and their
normal flora are mutualistic. In human
body, normal flora gets nutrients, a stable
environment and constant temperature,
protection, and transport. Similarly, body
also gets many benefits from normal
bacteria; for example;
i. Synthesis of vitamins (Vit.K, Vit.B12)
ii. Prevent colonization by pathogens
iii. Inhibit or kill pathogens
iv. Stimulates the production of cross-
reactive antibodies
Q37. Describe how normal flora
stimulates the production of cross-
reactive antibodies?
Ans. Cross reactive antibodies
The normal flora behaves as antigens; they
induce immunological response. Low levels
of antibodies produced against the normal
flora are known to cross-react with certain
pathogens, and thereby prevent infection or
invasion.
Q38. Discuss the role of normal flora
in synthesis of vitamins and
prevention of pathogen entry.
Ans. 1. Synthesis of vitamins: Bacteria
in alimentary canal produce vitamins. They
excrete vitamins which are in excess of their
needs. From alimentary canal, these
vitamins are absorbed and distributed in
body. For example, enteric bacteria secrete

--- Page 8 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM
Vitamin K and Vitamin B12, and lactic acid
bacteria produce certain B-vitamins.
2. Prevent colonization by pathogens:
The bacteria of normal flora compete with
pathogens for attachment sites and
Virus
Q39. Differentiate between capsid and capsomeres.
Ans. Following are the differences between Capsid and Capsomeres.
Capsid
• In viruses the core is surrounded by a
protein coat, called capsid.
• It gives definite shape to virus.
• Central core and capsid are collectively
called as nucleocapsid.
Capsomeres
• Capsid is made up of protein subunits
called as capsomeres.
• The number and kind of capsomeres is
characteristic of a particular virus.
Examples
i) Herpes virus (causes cold sores, chickenpox
etc.) contains 162 capsomeres in its capsid.
ii) Adenovirus (causes common cold)
contains 252 capsomeres in its capsid.
Q40. What are naked viruses? Brief
about general appearance of viruses.
Ans. Naked viruses
In some animal viruses, nucleocapsid is
covered by another membrane called
envelope. It is a lipid-rich membrane and is
derived from host cell. Non enveloped
viruses are known as naked-viruses.
General appearance
There is a great diversity in the general
appearance of viruses.
• The animal and plant viruses may be
polyhedron (having many sides) or
helical.
• The bacterial viruses (bacteriophages) may
be cubical, icosahedral (having 20 faces),
helical, or complex (polyhedral head and
rod-shaped tail).
* Q41. Discuss the role of
bacteriophages in genetic engineering.
Ans. Role of bacteriophages
Bacteriophages are used as carriers in
genetic engineering. The gene of interest is
inserted into the DNA of bacteriophage,
which carries it to the target bacterial cell.
When virus incorporates its DNA into
nutrients. So, pathogens have less chance of
entering body tissues.
3. Inhibit or kill pathogens: The intestinal
bacteria produce a variety of substances,
which inhibit or kill pathogen bacteria.
bacterial chromosome, the gene of interest
also becomes a part of bacterial DNA. Such
transgenic bacteria (transgenic: whose
genome has DNA of some other organism)
can be grown to get copies of the gene of
interest and to get the required protein.
Q42. Sketch the structure of T4-phage.
Ans.
Capsid
Core (DNA)
Neck
Sheath
Tail core
Tail fiber
End plate
Pin
Head
Tail
Structure of a bacteriophage
Q43. Briefly describe tail of a
bacteriophage.
Ans. Tail of bacteriophage
REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 9 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

The tail of a bacteriophage is also made of
inner core and outer sheath, both of which
are made of different proteins. A neck
attaches sheath with head and an end plate is
present on the other side of sheath. Six tail
fibres are attached with end plate.
Function
They help the phage to attach with bacterial
wall. These structures are also made of
proteins.
Q44. What do you know about
retroviruses?
Ans. Retroviruses
Retroviruses contain RNA and capsids. The
most distinguishing character of retroviruses
is the presence of a specific enzyme, reverse
transcriptase. This enzyme catalyses the
process of reverse transcription in which a single
stranded RNA is reversely transcribed into a
strand of DNA. The enzyme then uses DNA
strand to complete a double helix of DNA.
Q45. Comment about the entry of
HIV into humans.
Ans. Entry of HIV
Experts have concluded that HIV originated
in the jungles of Africa among wild chimps.
Evidence suggests that a form of this virus
entered human species and became HIV by
way of monkey bites or ingesting monkey
meat and brains.
Q46. Sketch the structure of HIV.
Ans.
Glycoprotein
Viral
envelope
Capsid
RNA
Reverse
Transcriptase
Structure of HIV
Q47. Brief about the discovery of AIDS.
Ans. Discovery of AIDS
The disease was first reported in 1981 and
the patients were found homosexual. Later
on, AIDS was discovered in non-
homosexual patients too who had received
blood or blood products from other AIDS
patients.
In 1984, it was discovered that the agent
causing AIDS was a virus. In 1986, the
AIDS causing virus was given the name
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). It
is a host specific virus. It can multiply in
monkeys but do not cause AIDS in them.
LONG QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)
Q1. Compare and contrast the cell wall
of Gram-positive and Gram-negative
bacteria.
Ans. See Q2. of theory.
Q2. Explain different methods of
movement in bacteria.
Ans. See Q5. of theory.
Q3. Explain the structure of bacterium
flagellum.
Ans. See Q6. of theory.
Q4. State the formation of endospore
in bacteria.
Ans. See Q4. of theory.
Q5. Briefly describe the ecological and
economic importance of bacteria.
Ans. See Q8. of theory.
Q6. Explain the use of bacteria in
research and technology.
Ans. See Q9. of theory.
Q7. Define the term normal flora. State
the benefits which we get from normal
bacterial flora.
Ans. See Q10. of theory.
Q8. Explain the structure of a model
bacteriophage and HIV.
Ans. See Q12. and Q13. of theory.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 10 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

INQUISITIVE QUESTIONS
Q1. Why do bacteria have ribosomes even though they do not have membrane
bound organelles?
Ans. Ribosomes in bacteria
Bacteria lack membrane bounded organelles, because they lack sub-cellular membrane they
have only one organelle which is not bounded by any membrane, that is ribosome (the sole
organelle of prokaryotes). The prime function of ribosomes is same as in eukaryotes that is
protein synthesis. Although they are smaller (70s) than eukaryotic ribosomes (80s).
Q2. If bacteria do not have mitochondria, how do they generate energy for survival?

Ans. Generation of energy
Bacteria although lack mitochondria, but they still obtain energy through cellular
respiration, especially involving electron transport chain and ATP synthase, which are
located in their plasma membranes (eukaryotes have ETC in mitochondrial membrane).
Q3. Why do certain bacteria exhibit twitching motility using pilli instead of flagella?

Ans. Twitching motility
Twitching motility also called crawling motility is
used by bacteria to move over surfaces. It is
provided and mediated by pili, which bind to
surrounding solid surface and retract. Thus
bacterial cell is pull forward in a crawling or twitching fashion.
Q4. Give reasons in favour of statement “Prevention is better than cure” and
present your arguments in class.
Ans. Prevention is better than cure
(i) Preventive actions are helpful in reducing the risk of spreading harm and disease to
others e.g. isolation in case of contagious diseases like mumps, measles, COVID-19 etc.
(ii) It helps to avoid the consequences which can not be fully reversed e.g. chronic diseases.
(iii) It ensures long term well being like regular screening tests helps in the early detection
of lethal diseases like cancer, emphysema, and increases survival chances.
(iv) Reduces physical, emotional or financial distress and is also cheaper than cure, which
are now a days very expensive.
Q5. Co-relate the social and cultural values of a country with the prevalence of AIDS.

Ans. Prevalence of AIDS
AIDS is a sexually transmitted disease and have many other modes of transmission (like
unscreened blood transfusion, body fluids, infected surgical instruments), and still today it is
incurable, and its prevelence is significantly influenced by the social and cultural values of a
country, following socio-cultural factors can contribute for AIDS prevelence.
(i) Lack of education and poor awareness about its contraction.
(ii) Religious oppositions.
(iii) Traditional healing (spiritual false) delaying in HIV treatment.
(iv) Weak health care systems i.e. lack of testing and treatment.
(v) Polygamy (in case of infected males).
(vi) Lack of circumcision (as male circumcision reduces female-to-male HIV transmission).
(vii) High risk group protections (drug user).

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch2 Short Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [16/36]: 11th Bio New Ch3 Long Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

Unit 3: Cells & Subcellular Organelles

Long Questions

DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONS

CELLS THE BASIC UNIT OF LIFE
Q1. What is cell? Explain seven basic properties of cell and living organism.
Ans. Cells are basic unit of life making every living organism. Some organisms are
unicellular like amoebas and bacteria and some are multicellular such as plants and animals.
All living organisms show the seven basic properties of life i.e., movement, respiration,
homeostasis, growth, reproduction, excretion, and nutrition. These properties actually define
living organisms. Cells perform all the fundamental activities that characterize living
organisms.
• Movement: Cells can move. For example, sperm cells move with their flagella. White
blood cells travel through the bloodstream to fight infections. Inside cells, organelles move
to carry out vital functions.
• Nutrition: Cells obtain nutrients from their environment to produce energy, build cellular
structures, and drive biochemical reactions.
• Respiration: Cells generate energy through respiration. This process breaks glucose to
release ATP, the energy currency that powers cellular activities.
• Excretion: Cells remove waste products through diffusion and active transport,
preventing toxic buildup.
• Homeostasis: Cells maintain a stable internal environment by regulating the movement
of substances across their membranes.
• Growth: Cells grow by taking in nutrients and converting them into cellular components.
• Reproduction: Cells reproduce through mitosis and meiosis. Mitosis produces identical
daughter cells for growth and repair, while meiosis creates gametes for sexual
reproduction.
CELL THEORY
Q2. Give detail of development of cell theory.
Ans. History: Contribution of different scientists in formulation of cell theory is as follows:
• Robert Hooke: In 1665, English scientist Robert Hooke examined a thin slice of cork of
oak tree under microscope. He observed that the cork was made of “many little boxes”.
Hooke also examined the pieces of stem and root of oak tree under microscope. He found
that these were also made of similar little boxes. He concluded that the parts of plants were
made of compartments. Hooke named these compartments as “cellulae”

★ Note: All questions and paragraphs marked with a star ★ are explanations of the Box
Information provided in the textbook.

REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 2 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

                                                                    Little boxes in cork
                                            Piece of cork
                                Fig: Robert Hooke’s microscope and observation
• Anton van Leeuwenhoek: In 1673, a Dutch scientist Anton van Leeuwenhoek made a
  better microscope and observed living cells in pond water. He called these cells as
  animalcules.
• Jean Baptiste de-Lamarck: In 1809, the French biologist Jean Baptiste de-Lamarck
  also observed cells when he examined the parts of animals and plants under microscope.
• Robert Brown: In 1831 the British botanist Robert Brown discovered nucleus in the cell.
• Matthias Schleiden: In 1838, the German botanist Matthias Schleiden observed many
  parts of plants under microscope. He concluded that all plants were composed of cells.
• Theodor Schwann: The German zoologist Theodor Schwann concluded the same for
  animals.
• Rudolf Virchow: In 1885, the German physician Rudolf Virchow (1821–1902) observed
  that all cells come from other cells.
• Louis Pasteur In 1862, Louis Pasteur provided the experimental proof of this idea. These
  observations were combined to form a basic theory about cells. It is called cell theory.
• Salient Features of cell theory
It has three essential points.
• All living organisms are composed of one or more cells.
• Cells are the basic units of structure and function in an organism.
• Cells come only from the division of pre-existing cells.
Q3. Explain about validation of cell theory. Also give exceptions to cell theory.

Ans. Validation of Cell Theory: Cell theory can be validated to prove correct through
several observations and experiments.
Example
• By using light microscopes and electron microscopes, scientists visualize (see) cell
  structures and find tangible (clear) evidence that cells are indeed the structural units of all
  living organisms.
• Through techniques like live-cell imaging and genetic studies, scientists can observe how
  cells replicate and give rise to new cells. These techniques validate the principle that all
  cells originate from pre-existing cells.
• Techniques like DNA sequencing reveal that cells share common genetic material and
  metabolic pathways, make the concept strong that the cell is the fundamental unit of life.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 3 ---
• Experiments, such as cell culture studies and tissue engineering, validate cell theory by
demonstrating cellular growth, differentiation, and reproduction.
Exceptions to Cell Theory
While cell theory is widely accepted, there are important exceptions. For example:
• Viruses challenge cell theory because they are not made of cells and cannot carry out life
processes independently. They require a host cell to replicate and are considered by many
scientists to be at the border of living and non-living entities. Similarly, prions and viroids
show properties of living organism but are not composed of cells. They are made of only
DNA, RNA or proteins.
• Eukaryotic organelles mitochondria and chloroplasts have their own DNA and can
replicate independently of the cell's nucleus. This suggests they may have originated from
free-living prokaryotic cells.
• Some organisms, such as certain fungi and algae, have structures where multiple nuclei
coexist within a same cytoplasmic mass. These structures create the confusion about the
boundaries of individual cells as defined by traditional cell theory.
• Muscle cells (myocytes) in vertebrates can fuse to form multinucleated fibres, challenging
the concept of a single cell as the basic unit in complex tissues.
MICROSCOPY
Q4. What is Microscopy? Write its significance and compare light microscopy with
electron microscopy.
Ans. Microscopy is the technique of using microscopes to observe and study objects that are
too small to be seen with the naked eye. Microscopes use lenses and light or electron beams to
magnify and make specimens bright and clear. Significance of microscopy is that further studies
of internal structure of cells walls dependent upon microscopy.
A. Light Microscopy
(i) Working Principle
In light microscope, light is used to make the image of object. Light passes through object and
then through two glass lenses. One lens produces an enlarged image of the object and the
second lens magnifies the image more. After passing through object and lenses, the light forms
enlarged clear image of object in viewer's eye.

Eyepiece
(Ocular lens)
Arm
Nosepiece
Objective lens
Specimen
Diaphragm
Coarse adjustment
Fine adjustment
Light source
Base
Viewer
Ocular Lens
Objective Lens
Specimen
Condenser
Light source
Fig: (a) Major parts of light microscope (b) working principle of light microscope

--- Page 4 ---
(ii) Magnification and Resolution
Magnification: The magnification of a light microscope is 1500X. It means it can magnify
objects about 1500 times. Its resolving power is 0.2 micrometre (µm) and 1µm = 1/1000 mm.
In other words, the light microscope cannot distinguish objects smaller than 0.2 µm.
(iii) Advantage
Light microscopes are advantageous for viewing living organisms, but since individual cells
are generally transparent, their components are not distinguishable unless they are coloured
with special stains (coloured chemicals). Staining, however, usually kills the cells.
B. Electron Microscopy
(i) Working Principle
In electron microscope, a beam of electrons passes
through the object. Magnetic lenses focus the electron
beam on a screen or photographic film and make much
enlarged image.
(ii) Resolving Power
Its resolving power is much greater than light
microscope. It can clearly show objects as small as 0.2
nanometre (nm) and 1 nm = 1/1000,000 mm.
However, electron microscope cannot be used for
viewing living material because of the methods
needed to prepare the specimens.
(iii) Types of Electron Microscope
Biologists use two types of electron microscopes.
(a) Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) is
used to view the internal structure of cell. TEM
transmits a beam of electrons through a very thin specimen. It can magnify objects up to
250,000 times.
(b) Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) is used to study the details of surfaces of cells or
any other objects. The surfaces are coated with metal. When electron beam hits the metal,
it is reflected and makes enlarged image. SEM's can magnify objects up to 100,000 times.

Fig: Electron microscope

Electron source
Condenser lenses
Aperture
Scanning coil
Objective lens
Back-scattered
electron detecor
Secondary
electron
detector
(a) Fig: Working principle of: (b)
Electron source
Condenser lenses
Condenser aperture
Sample
Objective lens
Objective aperture
Intermediate lenses
Projective lense
Fluorescent screen
and camera

(a) Scanning electron microscope (b) Transmission electron microscope.

--- Page 5 ---
Q5. Give various differences between electron microscope and light microscope.
Ans.
| Light Microscope | Electron Microscope |
| :--- | :--- |
| 1. Uses light (approx. 400-700 nm) as an illuminating source. | 1. Uses electron beams (approx. 1 nm) as an illuminating source. |
| 2. Lower magnification (usually 500X to 1500X) than an electron microscope. | 2. Higher magnification (direct magnification is 16000X and photographic magnification is 1000000X). |
| 3. Low resolution (may be 0.2µm) both live and dead specimens can be seen. | 3. High resolution (may be 0.2nm) only dead and the dried specimen can be seen. |
| 4. Specimen preparation takes about a few minutes or an hour. | 4. Specimen preparation takes several days. |
| 5. The image is seen through the ocular lens. No screen needed. | 5. The image is received on a zinc sulphate fluorescent screen. |

STRUCTURE OF CELL
Q6. Write note on structure and function of cell wall.
Ans. A. Structure: Cell wall is a more or less solid layer surrounding a cell. It is found in bacteria, fungi, plants, and algae. When a cell wall is removed using cell wall degrading enzymes, the remaining components of the cell are called a protoplast. It is composed of three layers.
• Primary Wall: The primary wall is the actual cell wall of cell. It is composed of polysaccharides i.e. cellulose, hemicellulose and pectin. The cellulose microfibrils are aligned at all angles and are held together by hydrogen bonds. Many proteins are also present in primary walls.
• Middle Lamella: The middle lamella is a gelatinous layer that separates and holds the primary walls of the neighbouring cells. It is laid first, formed from the cell plate during cytokinesis, and the primary cell wall is then expanded inside the middle lamella. It contains magnesium and calcium pectates (salts of pectic acid).
• The secondary wall is found in some plant cells, after maturation, a secondary wall is made between protoplast and primary wall. Secondary cell walls contain lignin, cellulose and hemicellulose. Due to the presence of lignin, secondary wall is more rigid than the primary wall.
B. Functions
Cell walls have a number of functions:
• They provide rigidity to the cell for structural and mechanical support; maintain cell shape and the direction of cell growth and ultimately the architecture of the plant.

Fig: The composition of primary cell wall

--- Page 6 ---
• The cell wall also prevents expansion when water enters the cell.
• Cell walls protect against pathogens and the environment and are a store of carbohydrates
for the plant.
Q7. What are plasmodesmata and write their function?
Ans. Plasmodesmata (singular, plasmodesma): These are small channels that directly
connect the cytoplasm of neighbouring plant cells to each other. Plasmodesmata penetrate
both the primary and secondary cell walls. They allow certain molecules to pass directly from
one cell to another. So, they are important in cellular communication.
Plasma
membrane Plasmodesma
Primary
wall
Middle
lamella
Vacuole
Fig: The cell walls of two neighbouring cells showing a plasmodesma
Plasmodesmata are formed during cell division when parts of the endoplasmic reticulum of the
parent cell get trapped in the new cell wall.
Q8. Compare cell wall composition of algae, fungi, prokaryotes and archaebacteria.
Ans. The cell wall of algae contains cellulose and a variety of glycoproteins.
The cell wall of fungi is composed of chitin, the same carbohydrate that gives strength
to the exoskeletons of insects.
The cell wall of prokaryotes (bacteria and cyanobacteria) is composed of peptidoglycan, that
is a single large polymer of amino acids and sugar.
The cell wall of archaebacteria is composed of different polysaccharides and proteins,
with no peptidoglycan.
PLASMA MEMBRANE
Q9. Explain structure of plasma membrane.
Ans. Plasma Membrane
Plasma membrane is a basic component of prokaryotic as well as eukaryotic cells. It encloses
the internet contents of cell and acts as semi-porous barrier. It controls the exchange of
materials between cell and external environment. Its structure is explained as follows.
A. Structure of plasma membrane:
Fluid Mosaic Model: The fluid mosaic model is a widely accepted concept that describes the
dynamic nature of plasma membrane. It was proposed by two American biologists S.J. Singer
and Garth Nicolson in 1972.

--- Page 7 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM
1. Lipid bilayer: According to the fluid mosaic model, the basic foundation of plasma
membrane is a lipid bilayer This bilayer is made of phospholipids. A collection of proteins
float within the lipid bilayer
2. Phospholipids: The phospholipids
have a phosphate group at one end of
each molecule. Phospholipids are
characteristically hydrophilic ("water-
loving") at their phosphate ends and
hydrophobic ("water-fearing") along
their tail regions containing C-H
chains. In the lipid bilayer of plasma
membrane, the hydrophobic lipid tails
are oriented inwards and the
hydrophilic phosphate groups are
aligned outwards, either toward the
cytoplasm of the cell or the
extracellular environment.
3. Cholesterol: In eukaryotes, plasma
membranes have cholesterol
molecules, wedged into the
phospholipid bilayer. They keep the
fluidity of membrane at low
temperatures.
4. Proteins: Many proteins float within
the phospholipid bilayer of plasma
membrane. Some other proteins simply
adhere to the surfaces of the bilayer.
The positioning of proteins is related to the organization of cytoskeleton.
Types and Functions of Proteins
Plasma membrane proteins function in several different ways.
• Selective transport: Many proteins play role in the selective transport of certain
substances across the phospholipid bilayer, either acting as channels or active transport
molecules.
• Attachment: Some proteins help in attachment of plasma membrane to cytoskeleton and
external fibres.
• Identification Marks: Some proteins, on the exterior surface, attach with sugars and make
identification marks.
• Receptors: Other proteins function as receptors, which bind messenger molecules (e.g.
hormones) and transmit signals to the interior of cell.
• Some proteins also exhibit enzymatic activity, catalysing various reactions related to the
plasma membrane.
Cell
Extracellular fluid
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
Endoplasmic
reticular
Plasma membrane
Carbohydrate
Glycoprotein
Globular protein
Protein Channel
(Transport protein)
Cholesterol
Glycolipid
Surface protein
Globular protein
(Integral)
Filaments of
cytoskeleton
Alpha-helix protein
(Integral protein)
Surface protein
Lipid bilayer
Phospholipid
(Phosphatidylcholine)
Hydrophilic head
Hydrophobic tail
Fig: Structural components of plasma
REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 8 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

TRANSPORTERS ANCHORS RECEPTORS ENZYMES
EXTRACELLULAR
SPACE
CYTOSOL

Fig: Major types of plasma membrane proteins

5. Glycocalyx
The outside surface of plasma membrane has chains of sugars bonded to proteins and lipids.
A protein with attached sugar is called a glycoprotein, whereas a lipid with attached sugar
is called a glycolipid. The glycoproteins and glycolipids vary from species to species,
from individual to individual in the same species, and even from one cell type to another
in the same individual. The glycolipids and glycoproteins (collectively called glycocalyx)
function as cell identification marks that are recognized by other cells.
Q10. Explain functions of plasma membrane.
Ans. Plasma membrane plays important role in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Its major
functions are:
(i) Plasma membranes serve as semi-porous barriers to the outside environment.
(ii) The membrane acts as a boundary, holding the cell constituents together.
(iii) The plasma membrane is permeable to specific molecules, however, and allows
nutrients and other essential elements to enter the cell and waste materials to leave
the cell.
(iv) Small molecules, such as oxygen, carbon dioxide, and water, are able to pass freely
across the membrane, but the passage of larger molecules, such as amino acids and
sugars, is carefully regulated.
(v) Eukaryotic cells also have membranes around some of their interior organelles. Like
the exterior plasma membrane, these membranes also regulate the flow of materials
into and out of organelles.

CYTOPLASM AND ORGANELLES
Q11. Write note on cytoplasm and organelles.
Ans.
Structure of cytoplasm
(i) The cytoplasm is a semi-viscous and semi transparent substance.
(ii) In eukaryotic cells, it is present between the plasma membrane and nuclear envelope.
(iii) In prokaryotic cells, it covers all the space beneath plasma membrane.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 9 ---
Plasmodesmata
Plasma membrane
Cell Wall
Chloroplast
Vacuole
Peroxisome
Cytoplasm
Golgi
vesicles Golgi
apparatus
cytoskeleton
Mitochondrion
Smooth
endoplasmic
reticulum
Ribosomes
Nuclear pore
Nuclear envelope
Nucleolus
Rough
endoplasmic
reticulum
Fig: The Ultra-structure of a Plant cell
(iv) It consists of an aqueous ground substance, known as cytosol, which contains a variety
of organelles and other inclusions.
(v) Cytosol contains water in which many organic (proteins, carbohydrates, lipids) and
inorganic salts are completely or partially dissolved.
(vi) The cytoplasm contains discrete structures which are specific for various cellular
functions and are called cell organelles. The organelles are generally enclosed by
membrane except few such as ribosome.
Nuclear envelope Nuclear pore Ribosome
Nucleolus
Plasma
membrane
Golgi
apparatus
Rough
endoplasmic
reticulum
Smooth
endoplasmic
reticulum
Peroxisome
Lysosome
Mitochondrion
Cytoskeleton
Cytoplasm
Centrosome
Secretory
vesicle
Fig: The Ultra-structure of an Animal cell

--- Page 10 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM
Functions of cytoplasm
(i) The cytoplasm of the cell provides space for the proper functioning of the organelles.
(ii) It also acts as the site for various biochemical (metabolic) reactions for example
Glycolysis (breakdown of glucose during aerobic respiration).
Q12. Mention various techniques to study the structure of plasma membrane.
Ans. Techniques to study the structure of plasma membrane
• Transmission Electron Microscopy can reveal detailed structures of the lipid bilayer
and associated proteins.
• Scanning Electron Microscopy is useful for examining the surface topology of cells
and membranes.
• Confocal Microscopy uses laser scanning and fluorescence to create sharp, detailed
images of the cell membrane.
• Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence Microscopy is used for high-resolution
images of the membrane and its interactions with the cytoskeleton and other cellular
components.
• Atomic Force Microscopy provides topographical images of cell membrane at high
resolution.
• X-ray Crystallography is used to determine the atomic structure of membrane
proteins.
• Lipidomics involves the comprehensive analysis of lipids in the cell membrane using
techniques like mass spectrometry.
• Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching is used to study the mobility and
dynamics of membrane proteins and lipids. It involves bleaching a fluorescently labelled
region of the membrane with a laser and observing the recovery of fluorescence as
unbleached molecules move into the area.
NUCLEUS
Q13. Explain structure and function of nucleus.
Ans. Nucleus
1. Location: A prominent nucleus is present in all eukaryotic cells (at centre in animal cells
while pushed to side in plant cells). The spherical nucleus typically occupies about 10 percent
of a eukaryotic cell's volume.
2. Functions of Nucleus
(i) It serves as information processing and administrative centre of the cell.
(ii) It performs two major functions: it stores the cell's hereditary material (DNA) and
coordinates the cell's activities e.g., growth, protein synthesis and cell division.
3. Structure of Nucleus
a. Nucleoplasm: The semifluid matrix found inside the nucleus is called nucleoplasm.
Within the nucleoplasm, most of the nuclear material consists of chromatin that organizes
to form chromosomes during cell division. The nucleus also contains one or more nucleoli,
which synthesize ribosomes.
REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 11 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM
b. The Nuclear Envelope: The
nuclear envelope is a double-
layered membrane that
encloses the contents of the
nucleus during most of the
cell's lifecycle. The space
between the double layers is
called the perinuclear space
and is connected with the
rough endoplasmic reticulum.
During cell division, the
nuclear envelope disintegrates,
but reforms in the daughter
cells.
c. Nuclear Lamina: On the inner
side of nuclear envelope, there
is a protein lining, called nuclear lamina. It binds to chromatin to give it structural support.
Nuclear Envelope
Chromatin
Nucleolus
Endoplasmic
Reticulum
Ribosomes
Nuclear
Pore
Fig: The structure of nucleus
Nuclear Pore Complexes in the Nuclear Envelope
Outer Nuclear Membrane
Cytosolic
Fibril
Annular
Subunit
Nuclear
Basket
Luminal
Subunit
Column
Subunit
Nuclear
Fibril
Nuclear
Lamina
Integral
Membrane
Protein
Nuclear
Envelope
Inner Nuclear
Membrane
Ring
Subunit
Fig: The structure of nuclear envelope and nuclear pore complex
d. Nuclear Pores
(i) The nuclear envelope has tiny holes known as nuclear pores. These pores regulate the
passage of molecules between nucleus and cytoplasm.
(ii) Nuclear pores are permeable to small molecules. Some larger proteins, e.g., histones are
also allowed to enter into nucleus.
(iii) A nuclear pore is made of an elaborate structure called the nuclear pore complex. It is
composed of several subunits.
• Annular subunit (surrounding the inside of the pore)
• Column subunit (making the wall of the complex)
• Ring subunit (attached to the outer side of the column subunit)
• Luminal subunit (anchoring the pore complex into the nuclear envelope)
REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 12 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM
e. Nucleolus
(i) The nucleolus is a prominent darkly
stained structure in the nucleoplasm.
There may be one or two nucleoli in a
nucleus.
(ii) Nucleoli manufacture the subunits
that combine to form ribosomes.
(iii) Nucleoli are formed at certain sites
in chromosome, called Nucleolus
Organizer Regions (NORs). The DNA
found at NORs encodes the ribosomal
RNA (rRNA).
(iv) The nucleolus consists of granular
and fibrillar components and DNA. The
granules consist of ribosomal subunits
that have already been formed. The
fibrils are composed of the raw
materials of ribosome subunits i.e.,
rRNA molecules and associated proteins.
f. Chromatin and Chromosomes
(i) Nucleus contains string-like fibres, collectively called chromatin.
(ii) It is composed of DNA and proteins.
(iii) The structure of chromatin reveals that it is made of a series of bead-like structures,
called nucleosomes.
(iv) In a nucleosome, DNA strand wraps around groups of small proteins called histones.
(v) During interphase (when the cell is carrying out its normal functions), the chromatin is
dispersed throughout the nucleus in the form of a tangle of fibres.
(vi) When the cell begins to divide, all chromatin strands are compressed into specialized
structures, the chromosomes.
(vii) A chromosome is made of arms, called chromatids and a central point called
centromere.
Nuclear Envelope
Chromatin
Nucleolus
Fig: The nucleolus within a nucleus
Nuclear
Pore
Chromatin
Fiber
Nucleosomes
DNA
-Helix
Histones
Centromere
-Arm
Condensed
Chromosome
Fig: Condensation of chromatin to form a chromosome
REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 13 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM
(viii) The number of chromosomes within the nuclei of an organism's cells is species-specific.
Human diploid cells (those that are not gametes) have 46 chromosomes. The
chromosome number may be as low as 2, in some ants and roundworms, or more may
be than a thousand as in the Indian fern (Ophioglossum reticulatum), which has 1,260
chromosomes. It means that the number of chromosomes in a species does not correlate
to the complexity of the organism.
ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM
Q14. Explain structure and function of endoplasmic reticulum.
Ans. A. Structure
1. Cisternae: It is a network of flattened sacs and branching tubules that extends throughout
the cytoplasm in plant and
animal cells. These sacs and
tubules are called cisternae
(singular cisterna).
2. Cisternal Space: All
cisternae are interconnected
so that the ER has only one
large and highly convoluted
lumen, called cisternal
space. It takes up more than
10 percent of the total
volume of a cell.
3. Double-Layered: The
cisternae are also connected
to the double-layered nuclear
envelope. So, the ER provides a pipeline between nucleus and cytoplasm.
B. Function: The ER manufactures, processes and transports a wide variety of biochemical
compounds for use inside and outside of the cell.
C. Kinds of Endoplasmic Reticulum
a. Rough endoplasmic reticulum: The surface of rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) is
covered with ribosomes, giving it a
bumpy appearance when viewed
through the microscope.
Function: This type of
endoplasmic reticulum is involved
mainly in the production and
processing of proteins. During
processing of proteins, RER adds
other chemicals (e.g. sugars) to
proteins. Then RER transports the
processed proteins to areas of the
Smooth
Endoplasmic
Reticulum
Endoplasmic Reticulum
Nuclear
Pore
Nuclear
Envelope
Cisternal
Space
Rough
Endoplasmic
Reticulum
Ribosomes
Fig: Endoplasmic reticulum
Transport vesicle
buds off
Carbohydrate
Ribosome
Secretory protein
inside
Transport vesicle
Rough ER
Fig: The functioning of rough endoplasmic reticulum
REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 14 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM
cell where they are needed, or sends them to Golgi apparatus for further processing and
modification.
b. Smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER)
The surface of smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) lacks ribosomes. So, it appears more
even under the microscope. In most cells, it is much less extensive than the rough endoplasmic
reticulum.
Function
(i) Smooth endoplasmic reticulum is chiefly involved in the production of lipids, building
blocks for carbohydrate metabolism.
(ii) Detoxification of drugs and poisons.
(iii) Smooth endoplasmic reticulum also plays a role in various cellular activities by storing
calcium and doing calcium metabolism.
(iv) In muscle cells, smooth endoplasmic reticulum releases calcium to trigger muscle
contractions.
RIBOSOMES
Q15. Explain structure and role of ribosomes in protein synthesis.
Ans. Structure and role of ribosomes
• All living cells contain ribosomes that are tiny granular structures composed of
approximately 60 percent ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and 40 percent protein.
• Ribosomes are not bound by a membrane and are much smaller than other organelles.
• In eukaryotic cells, ribosomes are mainly found attached to rough endoplasmic reticulum
and some are scattered freely.
• In prokaryotic cells, all ribosomes are freely scattered in cytoplasm. Ribosomes serve as
the protein production machinery for the cell.
• They are most abundant in cells that
are active in protein synthesis, such
as pancreas and brain cells.
• A typical cell contains several
thousand ribosomes but some cell
types may have a few million
ribosomes.
• Eukaryote ribosomes are produced
and assembled in the nucleolus.
Ribosomal proteins enter the
nucleus and combine with rRNA
strands to create the two ribosomal
subunits (one small and one large).
• The ribosome subunits leave the
nucleus through the nuclear pores. In the cytoplasm, both subunits combine for the
purpose of protein synthesis. When protein synthesis is not being done, the two subunits
get separated.
• Protein synthesis requires the assistance of two other kinds of RNA molecules in addition
to rRNA. Messenger RNA (mRNA) provides the instructions, which it has taken from the
DNA. Transfer RNA (tRNA) brings amino acids to the ribosome. Once the chain of amino
acids has been synthesized, the ribosome releases it.
Large subunit
Growing
polypeptide
mRNA
Small subunit
Fig: Ribosome translating the mRNA
REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 15 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

• The subunits of a ribosome are described by their Svedberg (S) values, which are based
upon their rate of sedimentation in a centrifuge.
• The complete ribosome in a eukaryotic cell has a Svedberg value of 80S. The smaller
subunit has value of 40S while the larger subunit has 60S.
• Prokaryotic cells, on the other hand, contain 70S ribosomes, each of which consists of a
30S and a 50S subunit.
MITOCHONDRIA
Q16. Explain structure and function of mitochondria.
Ans. Structure of Mitochondria
• Mitochondria (sing., mitochondrion) are rod-shaped organelles that are considered the
power generators of the cell.
• A mitochondrion is bounded by two membranes.
• There is a narrow intermembrane space between the two membranes.
• Beneath the inner membrane, there is a larger internal matrix.
• The outer membrane is smooth and acts like a sieve, filtering out molecules that are too
big.
• The inner membrane is highly convoluted and forms many infoldings called cristae which
increase the surface area.
• The inner surface of the cristae has knob-like extensions into the matrix, known as F-1
particles. These particles are actually the enzymes called ATP-synthase.
• Other complexes are also found in inner mitochondrial membrane, which serve as electron
carriers in electron transport chain.
• Mitochondria are different from most other organelles.
• A mitochondrion has its own circular DNA (similar to the DNA of prokaryotes), all kinds
of RNA and 70S ribosomes.
• A mitochondrion can replicate independently of the cell.

ribosomes
outer membrane
matrix
DNA
inner membrane
intermembrane
space
F0 portion
F1 portion
cristae
Fig: Structure of a mitochondrion

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]
[WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 16 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Functions of Mitochondria
• Mitochondria are the sites of cellular respiration.
• They generate adenosine triphosphate (ATP) from oxygen and nutrients. ATP is the
  chemical energy "currency" of the cell that powers the cell's metabolic activities.
• Enzymes in the mitochondrial matrix catalyse the steps of cellular respiration like Krebs
  cycle and ETC.
• The proteins that function as electron transport chain are found on the inner
  mitochondrial membrane.

CHLOROPLAST

Q17. Explain structure and function of chloroplasts.
Ans. Structure of Chloroplasts
• Importance: One of the most important characteristics of plants is their ability to conduct
  photosynthesis i.e., to make their own food by converting light energy into chemical
  energy. This process occurs in almost all plant species and is carried out in specialized
  organelles known as chloroplasts.
• Occurrence: All of the green structures in plants, including stems and un- ripened fruit,
  contain chloroplasts, but the majority of photosynthetic activity in most plants occurs in
  the leaves.
• Density: On the average, the chloroplast density on the surface of a leaf is about one-half
  million per square millimeter.
• Pigments: Chloroplasts contain the pigments chlorophyll “a” and chlorophyll “b”, which
  are able to absorb the light energy needed for photosynthesis to occur.
• Intermembrane Space: The ellipsoid-shaped chloroplast is enclosed by two membranes
  and the area between the two membranes is called the intermembrane space.
• Stroma: A semi-fluid called stroma is present inside the inner membrane. It contains
  dissolved enzymes and comprises most of the chloroplast's volume.
• Membranes: The outer membrane is much more permeable than the inner layer. The inner
  membranes lie in close association with one another and fuse along their peripheries.
• Thylakoid: In this way, two adjacent membranes form a disk-shaped compartment called
  thylakoid.
• Grana: Many thylakoids form stacks called grana (singular granum). Each granum may
  contain a few to several thylakoids, and a chloroplast may contain a hundred or more
  grana.
• Lamellae: The lamellae are the non- green compartments that connect two grana.
• Own DNA: Like the mitochondrion, the chloroplast is different from most other
  organelles because it has its own DNA and reproduces independently of the cell in which
  it is found.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 17 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

                                     Outer
                                     membrane
                                                                                                Inner
                                                                                                membrane

                                                                                                Granum
                                                     Lumen
                                     Stroma Stroma Thylakoid
                                     lamellae
                                             Fig: Structure of chloroplast

Functions of Chloroplast
• Light is absorbed by chlorophyll molecules embedded in the thylakoid disks.
• When these chlorophyll molecules absorb light, they emit electrons and thus ATPs are
  formed.
• Using these ATPs, in the stroma, low-energy carbon dioxide is transformed into a high-
  energy compound like glucose.

                                     GOLGI APPARATUS
Q18. Write note on structure and functions of Golgi apparatus.
Ans. Structure of Golgi Apparatus
★ Discovery: Golgi apparatus was discovered by Camillo Golgi.
• Cisternae: Golgi apparatus consists of five to eight cup-shaped, membrane-covered sacs
  called cisternae that are stacked over each other.
• It is found in the cells of plant, animal and unicellular eukaryotes.
• In some unicellular flagellates, the Golgi apparatus may consist of 60 cisternae.
• The number of Golgi apparatuses in a cell varies according to its function.
• Animal cells generally contain between 10 – 20 Golgi stacks in their Golgi apparatus.
• This complex is usually located close to the nucleus.
• Each Golgi stack has two distinct faces. The ‘cis’ face is found near the endoplasmic
  reticulum. The ‘trans’ face is positioned near the plasma membrane.
Functions of Golgi Apparatus
• The Golgi apparatus is the distribution and shipping department for the cell's chemical
  products.
• It modifies proteins and lipids that have been built in the endoplasmic reticulum and
  prepares them for export outside the cell or for transport to other locations in the cell.
• Small vesicles that contain proteins, carbohydrates, phospholipids and other molecules,
  bud off from the ER. These vesicles move through the cytoplasm until they reach the ‘cis’
  face of Golgi apparatus. The vesicles fuse with Golgi apparatus and release their molecules
  into it.
• Here, the compounds are further processed. Enzymes present in the Golgi lumen convert
  them into glycoproteins and glycolipids.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 18 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

• The product is extruded from
the `trans` face of the Golgi
apparatus in a vesicle and
directed to its final destination
inside or outside the cell. The
exported products are known
as secretions.
• Other products are returned to
the endoplasmic reticulum or
may undergo maturation to
become lysosomes.
• In addition, the Golgi
apparatus in plant cells
produces pectin and other
polysaccharides specifically
needed for plant structure and
metabolism.

[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

• The product is extruded from
the `trans` face of the Golgi
apparatus in a vesicle and
directed to its final destination
inside or outside the cell. The
exported products are known
as secretions.
• Other products are returned to
the endoplasmic reticulum or
may undergo maturation to
become lysosomes.
• In addition, the Golgi
apparatus in plant cells
produces pectin and other
polysaccharides specifically
needed for plant structure and
metabolism.

LYSOSOMES
Q19. Give detail structure and functions of lysosomes?
Ans. Structure of lysosomes
★ Discovery: Lysosomes were discovered by a Belgian scientist Christian Rene de Duve.
They contain strong digestive enzymes.
• Lysosomes are spherical organelles bounded by a single membrane.
• They serve as digestive compartments of the cell.
• Lysosomes are found in most
eukaryotic cells.
• In animals, they are most numerous
in disease-fighting cells, such as
white blood cells.
• This is because white blood cells
must digest materials like bacteria,
viruses, and other foreign intruders.
• Lysosomes have about 40 different
hydrolytic enzymes, all of which
are manufactured in the
endoplasmic reticulum and
modified in the Golgi apparatus.
Function of lysosomes
• The membrane covering of the
lysosome protects the rest of the
cell from the harsh digestive
enzymes contained in the
lysosomes, which would otherwise cause significant damage.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 19 ---
• They are also involved in breaking the cellular materials that have exceeded their lifetime
or are no longer useful. In this regard, the lysosomes perform autophagy (self-eating).
• They break down cellular waste products, fats, carbohydrates, proteins, and other
macromolecules into simple compounds, which are then transferred back into the
cytoplasm for making new materials (recycling).
• Lysosomes also function in the elimination of whole cell. Selective cell death is a
mechanism used by multicellular organisms in their development. For example, when a
tadpole develops into a frog, the cells of the tail are destroyed by the enzymes of lysosomes
(apoptosis).
Lysosomal Storage Diseases
In lysosomal storage diseases the patient lacks one of the hydrolytic enzymes of lysosome.
The abnormal lysosome fills with indigestible substances, which interfere with cellular
functions. Following are the examples of storage diseases
• In Pompe’s disease the lysosome lacks a glycogen-digesting enzyme. So, harmful
amounts of glycogen accumulate in liver cells.
• In Tay-Sachs disease an essential lipid- digesting enzyme is missing. Accumulation of
these lipids in the nerve cells of brain damages the nervous system, causes mental
retardation, and death in early childhood.

PEROXISOMES AND GLYOXISOMES

Q20. Write note on Peroxisomes? What is consequence of defects in peroxisome? Also
describe the location and function of glyoxisomes.
Ans. Structure
Peroxisomes are single membrane bounded organelles in all eukaryotic cells. These were
discovered by Christian de Duve, who also discovered lysosomes. Peroxisomes contain a
variety of enzymes. Many of these enzymes are oxidative that carry out oxidation i.e. the
removal of electrons and hydrogens.
Functions
• These enzymes primarily function to
rid the cell of toxic substances.
• Some peroxisomes, such as those in
liver cells, detoxify alcohol and other
harmful compounds by carrying out
their oxidation.
• Some peroxisomes contain catalase
enzymes, which break down hydrogen
peroxide (a common by-product of
cellular metabolism) into water and
oxygen.
2H2O2 Catalase 2H2O + O2
Hydrogen peroxide Water Oxygen

Fig: Structure of peroxisome

--- Page 20 ---
• Defects in peroxisomes cause a number of metabolic disorders. The most serious of these
disorders is Zellweger syndrome, which is characterized by absence or reduced number
of peroxisomes in the cells. It is congenital disorder (present at birth) and has no cure or
effective treatment and usually causes death within the first year of life.
Glyoxisomes
Location: Glyoxysomes are similar to peroxisomes but are found only in plant cells. They
are most abundant in the cells of lipid-rich seeds (e.g. castor beans and soyabeans).
Functions: These organelles contain enzymes that convert lipids into carbohydrates. During
germination, these organelles convert stored lipids into carbohydrates that provide energy
for seed germination.

VACUOLES

Q21. Write note on vacuoles.
Ans. (i) Definition
Vacuoles are membrane bound sacs sound both in animal and plant cells. Vacuoles have
different functions.
(ii) Position and formation is plant cells
Many plants cells have a large, single central vacuole. This large vacuole develops by fusion
of smaller vacuoles in plants sells. It occupies 80% or more space in plant cells.
(iii) Structure
(a) Tonoplast: Vacuole is plant cells is surrounded by membrane called tonoplast.
(b) Cell sap: The material inside the vacuole is called cell sap. The cell sap differs
markedly from the surrounding cytoplasm.
(iv) Functions
(a) In mature plant cells: A single large vacuole provides structural support, as well as
serves functions in storage, waste disposal, protection, and growth.
(b) In animal cells: Vacuoles are much smaller, and are more commonly used to
temporarily store materials or to transport substances.
(c) Turgor pressure: The central vacuole in plant cells plays an important structural
role for the plant. This role of the vacuole is related to its ability to control turgor
pressure. Turgor pressure makes the rigidity of the cell. Under optimum conditions,
a plant receives adequate amounts of water and the central vacuoles of its cells swell
as the liquid collects within them. It creates a high turgor pressure, to maintain the
structural integrity of the plant, along with the support from the cell wall.
(d) Store the pigments: Vacuoles also often store the pigments that give certain flowers
their colours, which aid them in the attraction of bees and other pollinators.
(e) Protection: Vacuoles also release molecules that are poisonous to various insects and
animals, thus discouraging them from consuming the plant.

--- Page 21 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

CENTRIOLES
Q22. Write short note on Centrioles.
Ans. Centrioles
In the cells of animals and most protists, centrioles are organelles associated with the
assembly and organization of the fibres of
cytoskeleton i.e., microtubules (including
spindle fibres).
In eukaryotic cells centrioles occur in pairs.
The two centrioles are located at right angles
to one another near the nuclear envelope. In
ciliated or flagellated cells centrioles are
involved in the formation of cilia and
flagella. Each cilium and flagellum are
anchored by a centriole, known as basal
body.
The cells of plants and fungi lack
centrioles and basal bodies, and their
microtubules and spindle fibres are
organized from the structures of cytoplasm.

Microtubule
triplet

Fig: centrioles

CYTOSKELETON
Q23. What is cytoskeleton? Gives its composition and functions.
Ans. It is a network of protein fibres present in cytoplasm. It includes the following types
of fibres:
1. Microfilaments
a. These are present in all eukaryotic cells.
b. Microfilaments are solid rods made of a globular protein, called actin.
c. Microfilaments disassemble and re-assemble and help the cells to change shape and move.
d. Microfilaments also enable a dividing cell to pinch off into two cells.
e. In association with myosin, microfilaments help in cellular contraction.
2. Microtubules
a. These straight, hollow cylinders are composed of subunits. Each subunit is made of two
different tubulin proteins known as alpha-tubulin and beta-tubulin.
b. Microtubules give structure and shape to a cell.
c. They also serve as highways for the transport of organelles.
d. Microtubules are the major components of cilia and flagella, and participate in the
formation of spindle fibres during cell division.
3. Intermediate filaments
a. These are found only in some higher animal groups.
b. They are made of different proteins but the most common type of protein subunit is
vimentin.
c. Some cells may have intermediate filaments made of other proteins. For example, skin
cells contain a protein keratin.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 22 ---
d. Intermediate filaments maintain cell shape and rigidity, and serve to anchor several
organelles, including the nucleus.

7 nm
8-12 nm
25 nm
Actin monomer
Fibrous subunit
B-tubulin
monomer
a-tubulin
monomer
Tubulin dimer
Cell
membrane
Nucleus

Fig: Components of cytoskeleton

CILIA and FLAGELLA

Q24. Write a note on Cilia and Flagella.
Ans. Cilia and Flagella
• Cilium (plural cilia) and flagellum (plural flagella) are the locomotor appendages that
protrude from certain cells.
• They are thin, tail-like projections extending from the cell body.
• Cilia are short in length and
are usually numerous in
number; while flagella are
longer but less numerous.
• Cilia are rare in plants. Many
protozoans (ciliates) possess
cilia e.g., paramecium.
• Larger eukaryotes such as
mammals have cilia on some
cells' surfaces. For example, in
humans, cilia are found in the
lining of the trachea where
they sweep mucus and dirt out
of breathing tubes.

Dynein
Arms
Outer
Microtubule
Doublet
Radial
Spoke
Central
Microtubule
(Axoneme)
Plasma
Membrane
Dynein
Arms
Figure 1
Basal Body (Kinetosome)

Fig: Structure of Eukaryotic cilium and flagellum

--- Page 23 ---
Structure
• The core of eukaryotic cilia and flagella is called axoneme.
• It contains two central microtubules
that are surrounded by an outer ring
of nine doublet microtubules.
• Dynein molecules are located around
the circumference of the axoneme.
• These dynein molecules bridge the
gaps between adjacent microtubule
doublets.
• Biologists refer to this organization
as a "9 + 2" structure.
• A plasma membrane surrounds the
entire axoneme.
• At the base of the cilium its
organizing centre, called basal body,
is present. Basal body has the same
basic structure of the outer ring of
axoneme, but each of the nine sets of
outer filaments is composed of three
microtubules, rather than a doublet of
microtubules.
• The basal body is actually the
modified centriole.
• Prokaryotic flagella have a completely different structure built from the protein flagellin.

PROKARYOTIC AND EUKRYOTIC CELLS

Q25. Write characteristics of Prokaryotic Cells.
Ans. Bacteria and archaea are made up of prokaryotic cells. Following are the
characteristics of prokaryotic cells.
• Prokaryotic cells are much simpler than eukaryotic ones.
• Most prokaryotic cells range from 2 to 8 µm in length i.e., about one-tenth of the size of a
typical eukaryotic cell.
• A prokaryotic cell lacks a nucleus.
• The much less extensive DNA of prokaryotic cell is present in the more-or-less central
region known as nucleoid (nucleus-like).
• A prokaryotic cell also lacks other membrane-bounded organelles like endoplasmic
reticulum, mitochondria, chloroplasts, Golgi apparatus, lysosomes, peroxisomes etc.
• The entire cytoplasm of a prokaryotic cell is one unit with no internal support structures.
• Ribosomes are present in prokaryotic cell but these are smaller in size than those of
eukaryotic cells.
• The Svedberg values (sedimentation rates) of the smaller and larger subunits of ribosomes
of prokaryotic cells are 30S and 50S respectively. The sedimentation rate of a complete
ribosome is 70S.

--- Page 24 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

• Surrounding the plasma membrane of most prokaryotic cells is a cell wall but it does not
contain cellulose. It is composed of peptidoglycan that is a single large polymer of amino
acids and sugar.
• In bacteria the cell wall may also be surrounded by a capsule and may also have extensions
for attachment known as pili (singular pillus).
• Prokaryotic flagella are made of repeating units of the protein flagellin and they do not
contain microtubule triplets.
• Mitosis and meiosis are missing in prokaryotic cell and it divides by direct division (binary
fission).
                                     Capsule
                                     Cell wall
                                     Plasma membrane
                                     Cytoplasm
                                     Ribosomes
                                     Plasmid
                                     Pili
                                                                    Flagellum
                                                                    Nucleoid
                                                                    (circular DNA)

                                     Fig: Structure of generalized prokaryotic cell
Q26. Give difference between Eukaryotic and Prokaryotic cells.
Ans.
| Sr. | Characteristics | Eukaryotic Cell | Prokaryotic Cell |
| No. | | | |
| 1. | Distinct Nucleus | Present | Absent |
| 2. | Number of | More than one | One—but not true chromosome: |
| | chromosomes | | plasmids |
| 3. | Cell Type | Usually multicellular | Usually unicellular (some |
| | | | cyanobacteria may be multicellular) |
| | Examples | Protozoans, Algae, Fungi, Animals, | Bacteria and Archaea |
| | | Plants | |
| 4. | Lysosomes and | Present | Absent |
| | peroxisomes | | |
| 5. | Microtubules | Present | Absent or rare |
| 6. | Endoplasmic | Present | Absent |
| | reticulum | | |
| 7. | Mitochondria | Present | Absent |
| 8. | Cytoskeleton | Present | May be absent |
| 9. | Vacuoles | Present | Present |
| 10. | Ribosomes | Larger | Smaller |

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                    [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 25 ---
| 11. | Gogi apparatus | Present | Absent |
| 12. | Chloroplasts | Present (in plants) | Absent; chlorophyll scattered in the cytoplasm |
| 13. | Cell Division | Mitosis or meiosis | Mitosis and meiosis are missing; cell divides by direct division (binary fission) |
| 14. | Flagella | Membrane bounded; contains two central microtubules surrounded by an outer ring of nine doublet microtubules. | Not membrane bounded; made of repeating units of flagellin; do not contain microtubule triplets |
| 15. | Cell Wall | Only in plant cells and fungi (chemically simpler) | Composed of peptidoglycan (a single large polymer of amino acids and sugar) |
| 16. | Cell size | 10-100 um | 1-10 um |

CELL SIGNALLING

Q27. What is cell signalling? Explain various steps in it.
Ans. Definition: Cell signalling is the ability of cells to respond to stimuli from their environment producing cellular responses. It involves the transmission of signals between cells through a series of molecular events, often leading to a cellular response.
Steps of Cell Signalling
1. Signal Reception
Cell signalling begins when a signal molecule (ligand) binds to a receptor on the membrane of a target cell. These receptors are typically proteins embedded in the cell membrane but can also be located inside the cell. Each receptor is specific to a particular ligand.
2. Signal Transduction
Once the receptor binds to the ligand, it undergoes a conformational change that activates an intracellular signalling pathway. This often involves a series of interactions and modifications, creating a signalling cascade that amplifies the signal. Small molecules like cAMP (cyclic AMP), calcium ions, and inositol triphosphate (IP3) can act as second messengers, transmitting the signal from the receptor to target molecules inside the cell.
3. Cellular Response
The signal transduction pathway often leads to changes in gene expression, turning specific genes on or off. This can result in various cellular responses, such as cell growth, division, differentiation, or apoptosis (programmed cell death). Signalling can also lead to changes in cellular metabolism, enzyme activity, or the opening and closing of ion channels.

Fig: Steps of cell signaling

--- Page 26 ---
Q28. Explain pathways of cell signals from outside to inside.
Ans. Definition: Cell signalling pathways involve the transmission of signals from the cell's
exterior to its interior, resulting in a specific cellular response.
Types: There are two main types of signalling pathways.
(i) Protein/Peptide Signalling
(ii) Steroid Signalling
(i) Protein/Peptide Signalling
• Protein or peptide signalling molecules are water-soluble. So, they cannot pass through
plasma membrane.
• When such ligand approaches the cell surface, it binds to its specific receptor on plasma
membrane.
• This binding causes a conformational change in the receptor protein and activates it. The
activated receptor triggers a series of reactions within the cell.
• These reactions generate second messenger like cyclic AMP (cAMP) which starts changes
e.g., changes in gene expression. The pathway can lead to changes in metabolism, cell
growth, division, or apoptosis.

EXTRACELLULAR
SPACE
Steroid
hormone
signal
SIGNAL
RECEPTION
CYTOPLASM
SIGNAL
TRANSDUCTION
Receptor
Receptor-hormone
complex
Fig: Protein / peptide signalling pathway

(ii) Steroid Signalling
• Steroid hormones, being lipophilic, can diffuse through the plasma membrane of the target
cell.
• Once inside, they bind to specific intracellular receptors located in the cytoplasm or
nucleus. This binding results in the formation of active receptor- hormone complex
which moves into the nucleus if it was not already there.
• Inside nucleus, the receptor-hormone complex binds to specific DNA sequences in target
genes.
• This binding regulates the transcription of these genes, leading to increased or decreased
production of specific proteins.

--- Page 27 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

EXTRACELLULAR                               CYTOPLASM
      SPACE                                     second
                                                messenger
                                  Relay molecules
Peptide
 signal
                Receptor
    SIGNAL                          SIGNAL
  RECEPTION                      TRANSDUCTION

                                Fig: Steroid signalling pathway
MEMBRANE TRANSPORT MECHANISMS

Q29. Explain passive transport and its types.
Ans. Definition: The movement of molecules across plasma membrane without any
expenditure of energy is called passive transport.
Types: The following are the types of passive transport.
a. Diffusion
Diffusion is the net movement of a substance
(liquid or gas) from an area of higher
concentration to one of lower concentration
i.e., along concentration gradient. Because a
cell does not expend energy when molecules
diffuse across its membrane, the diffusion of
molecules is a type of passive transport.
b. Facilitated Diffusion
Some molecules are taken into or out of the
cells with the help of transport-proteins
present in plasma membranes. When a
transport protein helps a substance to move it
down its concentration gradient (from higher
to lower concentration), the process is called
facilitated diffusion. It is also a type of passive
transport because no energy is used in
facilitated diffusion. The rate of facilitated
diffusion depends on how many transport-
protein molecules are available in the
membrane. The main types of transport
proteins involved in facilitated diffusion are:
1. Channel Proteins: These proteins form
hydrophilic channels across the membrane that allow specific molecules or ions to pass

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 28 ---
through. They can be gated or non-gated. Gated channels open or close in response to specific
stimuli (such as voltage changes, ligand binding, or mechanical stress). Examples include ion
channels (allow the passage of specific ions e.g., Na⁺, K⁺, Ca²⁺, Cl⁻) and aquaporin (facilitate
the rapid transport of water molecules) while non-gated channels remain open constantly.
2. Carrier Proteins (Transporters): These proteins bind to the specific molecule they
transport, undergo a conformational change, and move the molecule across the membrane.
They are highly specific for the molecule they transport. They can become saturated, meaning
there is a maximum rate of transport when all carrier proteins are occupied. Examples include
glucose transporters (facilitate the transport of glucose) and amino acid transporters (transport
specific amino acids into or out of the cell).
Q30. Give difference between simple and facilitated diffusion
Ans.
| | Simple Diffusion | Facilitated Diffusion |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Mechanism** | Substances move from higher concentration to lower concentration directly through the lipid bilayer of plasma membrane. | Substances move from higher concentration to lower concentration through specific transport proteins embedded in plasma membrane. |
| **Energy Requirement** | It is a passive transport mechanism, requiring no energy input from cell. | It is also a passive transport mechanism and does not require energy. |
| **Types of Molecules** | Typically involves small, nonpolar molecules such as oxygen, carbon dioxide and lipid-soluble substances. | Primarily involves polar or charged molecules, such as glucose, amino acids, and ions, which cannot easily pass through the hydrophobic core of the lipid bilayer. |
| **Rate of Movement** | The rate depends on the concentration gradient temperature and the permeability of the membrane. | The rate can be affected by the number and availability of transport proteins and can reach a maximum rate when all transport proteins are saturated. |

Q31. Write note on osmosis and reverse osmosis.
Ans. Osmosis
Definition: The process by which water molecules diffuse across a cell membrane from an
area of higher concentration to an area of lower concentration is called osmosis.
Passive transport: Because water is moving from a higher to lower concentration, osmosis
does not require cells to expend energy. Therefore, osmosis is the passive transport of water.

--- Page 29 ---
Direction: The direction of osmosis
depends on the concentration of solutes
on the two sides of membrane.
Water always moves from hypotonic
solution (with lower solute concentration)
to hypertonic solution (with higher solute
concentration).
Selectively permeable membrane:
Osmosis occurs through selectively
permeable membrane, which allows
water to pass while restricting many
solutes.
Cell turgor: Osmosis is crucial for
maintaining cell turgor, which is vital for
plant cells, and for balancing the internal
water content in cells.
The direction and rate of osmosis are influenced by the osmotic gradient and the permeability
of the membrane to water.
Aquaporins: Specialized proteins called aquaporins facilitate the rapid transport of water
molecules across the cell membrane, ensuring efficient regulation of cellular hydration and
volume.
★ Reverse osmosis
• It is a widely used technology for purifying water by removing contaminants and impurities.
• Unlike natural osmosis,
which moves water a lower to
a higher solute concentration.
• Reverse osmosis applies
external pressure to push
water through a semi-
permeable membrane from a
higher to a lower solute
concentration.
• This process effectively filters out dissolved salts and other impurities, providing clean and
safe drinking water.
• Reverse osmosis is commonly used in water treatment plants desalination facilities and even
in household water purification systems.
Q32. What is active transport? Explain its types.
Ans. Definition: The movement of substances across plasma membrane from lower
concentration to higher concentration with the expenditure of energy is known as active
transport.

--- Page 30 ---
Types
Following types of active transport occur through plasma membrane.
1. Active transport through carrier proteins
In this process, carrier (transport) proteins in the plasma membrane use energy to move the
molecules against the concentration gradient. For example, the membranes of nerve cells have
carrier proteins in the form of “sodium-potassium pump”. In a resting (not conducting nerve
impulse) nerve cell, this pump spends energy (ATP) to maintain higher concentrations of K
and lower concentrations of Na* inside the cell. For this purpose, the pump actively moves
Na* to the outside of the cell and K* to the inside of the cell.

Outside cell
Transport
protein
Plasma
membrane
Na*
Cytoplasm
Fig: Active transport through carrier proteins

2. Endocytosis
In endocytosis, bulky materials are moved into the cell across plasma membrane. During
endocytosis a portion of plasma membrane invaginates (depressed inward). The material from
outside is taken inside the invagination, and its ends seal. Thus, a small vesicle is formed. It
detaches from the plasma membrane and moves into cytoplasm. The two common forms of
endocytosis are phagocytosis and pinocytosis.
a. In phagocytosis, cell takes in solid material while in
b. pinocytosis, cell takes in liquids in the form of droplets.
★ Receptor-mediated endocytosis
Specific receptor proteins of plasma membrane pick
up material from outside and pinch inside to form a
vesicle. For example, the cells of liver have receptor
proteins for cholesterol. Cholesterol circulates in
our blood in the form of low-density-lipoproteins
(LDLs). The receptor proteins of plasma membrane
of liver cells, recognize and take up LDLs from the
blood by receptor-mediated endocytosis.
3. Exocytosis
It is the process through which bulky material is exported out of cell. In exocytosis, the bulky
material is packed inside a membrane and a vesicle is formed. The vesicle moves to the plasma
membrane and fuses with it to release its contents into the extracellular environment.

--- Page 31 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

(A)
Plasma
membrane
Outside of cell
Inside of cell
Material Imported
(B)
Material Exported
Material packed
in vesicle
Fig: (A) Endocytosis, (B) Exocytosis
Q33. What are stem cells? Describe their categories on the basis of types of cells they
make.
Ans. Stem cells are unique cells with the remarkable ability to develop into many different
cell types in the body. When a stem cell divides, each new cell has the potential either to
remain a stem cell or to become specialized cell, such as a muscle cell, a red blood cell, or a
brain cell. The following are the major categories of stem cells on the basis of the number of
types of cells which they can make.
1. Totipotent: These stem cells can differentiate into all possible cell types. For example,
zygote and the cells produced by the first few divisions in zygote.
2. Pluripotent: These cells can turn into almost any cell. For example, cells from the early
embryo.
3. Multipotent: These cells can differentiate into a closely related family of cells. For
example, the hematopoietic stem cells can become red and white blood cells or platelets.
4. Oligopotent: These can differentiate into a few different cell types. For example, adult
lymphoid or myeloid stem cells.
5. Unipotent: These can only produce cells of one kind, which is their own type. However,
they are still stem cells because they can renew themselves. For example, adult muscle stem
cells.
Q34. Write uses of stem cells.
Ans. Following are the uses of stem cells
(i) Regenerative Medicine: Stem cells have the potential to repair or replace damaged
tissues and organs. Therefore, they are used for treating conditions such as spinal cord
injuries, type 1 diabetes, Parkinson's disease, and heart disease.
(ii) Drug Testing and Development: By differentiating stem cells into specific cell types,
researchers can create models of human diseases, allowing for more accurate testing of
drug effects and reducing the reliance on animal models.
(iii) Personalized Medicine: Stem cells can be derived from a patient's own cells, reducing
the risk of immune rejection when used in treatments. This personalized approach can
lead to more effective and safer therapies.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 32 ---
Q35. Explain different categories of stem cells on the basis of their origin.
Ans. Categories of stem cells
The following are the major categories of stem cells on the basis of their origin.
1. Embryonic Stem Cells (ESCs)
ESCs are derived from the inner cell mass of blastocysts (early-stage embryos). These stems
cells are pluripotent, meaning they can differentiate into nearly all cell types in the body. They
have high differentiation potential, making them extremely versatile for research and therapy.
Ethical concerns of using ESCs include the use of human embryos, risk of teratoma formation,
and potential immune rejection.
2. Adult Stem Cells (ASCs)
These stem cells are found in various tissues throughout the body, such as bone marrow, fat,
and blood. They are multipotent, meaning they can differentiate into a limited range of cell
types related to their tissue of origin. Using them involves less ethical controversy, lower risk
of immune rejection when derived from the patient's own tissues. However, they have limited
differentiation potential and are harder to isolate and culture.
3. Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPSCs)
They are generated in the lab by reprogramming adult somatic cells to a pluripotent state using
specific transcription factors. They are pluripotent, similar to embryonic stem cells.
Advantages of using iPSCs: They do not have the ethical controversies linked to embryonic
stem cells, as they do not require the destruction of embryos. They can be generated from a
patient's own cells, minimizing the risk of immune rejection. They offer potential for
regenerating damaged tissues and organs (e.g., new heart cells for patients with heart disease
or new neurons for patients with neurodegenerative conditions).
Disadvantages of using iPSCs: The reprogramming process can introduce genetic changes
that may affect iPSCs. They could form tumours (teratomas) when transplanted into patients.
Directing iPSCs to differentiate into specific, fully functional cell types remains a complex
task. It is still difficult to ensure that these cells function properly.

Fig: Stem cells - sources and types

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch3 Long Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [17/36]: 11th Bio New Ch3 MCQ's.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
Unit 3: Cells & Subcellular Organelles

Multiple Choice Questions

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)

Choose the correct answer.
1. Which one of the following eukaryotic cell structures does not contain DNA?
(a) Nucleus
(b) Mitochondrion
(c) Endoplasmic reticulum
(d) Chloroplast
2. Which of the following is not an accurate description of a chromosome?
(a) It is a coloured body localized in the nucleus
(b) It is a protein and nucleic acid complex
(c) It is the cellular structure that contains the genetic material
(d) In eukaryotes, it is composed of many DNA molecules attached end to end
3. A centriole is an organelle that is:
(a) Present in the centre of a cell's cytoplasm
(b) Composed of microtubules and important for organizing the spindle fibres
(c) Surrounded by a membrane
(d) Part of a chromosome
4. The rough endoplasmic reticulum is:
(a) An intracellular double-membrane system to which ribosomes are attached
(b) An intracellular membrane that is studded with microtubular structures
(c) A membranous structure found within mitochondria
(d) Only found in prokaryotic cells
5. In the nucleus of eukaryotic cells, the genetic material is complexed with protein and organized into linear structures called:
(a) Centrioles
(c) Chromosomes
(b) Histones
(d) Plasmids
6. Which of the following statements does not apply to the nuclear envelope?
(a) It is a double membrane
(b) It is continuous with the endoplasmic reticulum
(c) It has pores through which material enters and leaves
(d) It has infoldings to form crisate
7. Lysosomes are formed by budding from which cellular organelle?
(a) Smooth endoplasmic reticulum
(b) Golgi apparatus
(c) Rough endoplasmic reticulum
(d) Nucleus
8. All peroxisomes carry out this function:
(a) Break down fats and amino acids into smaller molecules that can be used for energy production by mitochondria
(b) Digest macromolecules using the hydrolytic enzymes they contain
(c) Synthesize membrane components such as fatty acids and phospholipids
(d) Control the flow of ions into and out of the cell
9. How would the absence of peroxisomes in a cell affect its metabolism, and what would be the likely symptoms?
(a) The cell would be unable to carry out oxidative phosphorylation, leading to reduced ATP production
(b) The cell would accumulate hydrogen peroxide, leading to oxidative stress and potential cellular damage.
(c) The cell would have impaired protein synthesis, leading to muscle weakness.
(d) The cell would fail to produce lipids, causing membrane instability

--- Page 2 ---
10. Which of the following does not apply
to chloroplasts?
(a) They contain chlorophyll and the
enzymes required for photosynthesis.
(b) They contain an internal membrane
system consisting of thylakoids.
(c) They synthesize ATP.
(d) They are bounded by two membranes,
the inner of which is folded into the
cristae.
11. What is the correct sequence of
membrane compartments through
which a secretory protein moves from
synthesis to release from the cell?
(a) SER → Golgi apparatus → RER →
Cell membrane
(b) Cell membrane → Golgi apparatus →
RER → SER
(c) RER → Golgi → Cell membrane →
SER
(d) RER → SER → Golgi apparatus →
Cell membrane
12. How does the process of facilitated
diffusion differ from active transport?
(a) Facilitated diffusion requires energy,
active transport does not
(b) Facilitated diffusion does not require
energy, active transport does
(c) Both processes require energy
(d) Both processes do not require energy

SLO BASED MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS

Cell theory
13. Who concluded that parts of plants
were made of compartments?
(a) Robert Hooke
(b) Robert Whittaker
(c) Louis Pasteur
(d) Leeuwenhoek
14. Nucleus was discovered by:
(a) Robert Koch
(b) Louis Pasteur
(c) Theodor Schwann
(d) Robert Brown
15. Which of the following is exception to
cell theory?
(a) Bacteria (b) Fungi
(c) Virus (d) Algae
Microscopy
16. Ability to enlarge the image of an
object is called:
(a) Resolution (b) Magnification
(c) Extension (d) Expansion
17. Ability to distinguish between two
points are close together on an object
is:
(a) Staining (b) Magnification
(c) Resolution (d) Division
18. Resolution of light microscope is:
(a) 0.2 micrometer (b) 0.2millimeter
(c) 0.2nanometer (d) 0.2 millimeter
19. Resolution of electron microscope is:
(a) 0.2 nanometer (b) 0.2 micrometer
(c) 0.2 centimeter (d) 0.2 centimeter
Structure of cell
20. Yeast and Euglena are:
(a) Unicellular eukaryotes
(b) Multicellular eukaryotes
(c) Non-cellular prokaryotes
(d) Unicellular prokaryotes
21. Actual cell wall of cell is:
(a) Secondary wall
(b) Primary wall
(c) Middle lamella
(d) Tertiary wall

--- Page 3 ---
22. The small channel that directly connect
cytoplasm of neighbouring plant cells
to each other are:
(a) Plasmodesmata (b) Stomata
(c) Golgi apparatus (d) Vacuole
23. According to fluid mosaic model
proteins are:
(a) Present outside lipid bilayer
(b) Present towards innerside of lipid
bilayer
(c) Float in the lipid bilayer
(d) Not present in the cell membrane
24. The glycoprotein and glycolipids on
outside surface of plasma membrane
are collectively called as:
(a) Phospholipoid
(b) Glycocalyx
(c) Phosphoproteins
(d) Lipoproteins
25. Scanning electron microcopy is useful
for examining:
(a) Internal structure
(b) Internal function of cell
(c) Surface topology of cell
(d) Signal transmission of cell
26. X-ray crystallography is used to study:
(a) Surface topology of cell
(b) Create sharp and detail images
(c) Atomic structure of membrane
proteins
(d) High resolution image of membrane
27. Three major components i.e. plasma
membrane, cytoplasm and nucleus
make up:
(a) Tissue (b) Organ
(c) Organelle (d) Cell
28. Organelles are generally enclosed by a
membrane except:
(a) Ribosomes (b) Lysosomes
(c) Peroxisomes (d) glyoxisomes
29. The semifluid matrix found inside the
nucleus is called:
(a) Nucleolus (b) Chromosomes
(c) Nucleoplasm (d) Cytoplasm

30. Nuclear Lamine on the innerside of a
nuclear envelope is inject:
(a) Protein (b) Lipid
(c) Vitamin (d) Nucleotide
31. Which one is not related to the nuclear
pore:
(a) Annular subunit
(b) Column subunit
(c) Ribosomal subunit
(d) Lumenal subunit
32. Nucleoli are formed at certain sites
called nucleolar organizer regions
found on:
(a) Chromosomes
(b) Nuclear membrane
(c) Nuclear pores
(d) Nucleoplasm
33. Granular components of nucleolus
consist of:
(a) DNA molecules
(b) Ribosomal subunits
(c) Centriolar subunits
(d) Nucleolar subunits
34. A chromosome is made of chromatids
and:
(a) Centromere
(b) Centrioles
(c) Microfilaments
(d) Microtubules
35. Surface of rough endoplasmic
reticulum is covered with:
(a) Centrioles (b) Nucleolus
(c) Ribosomes (d) Nucleosome
36. Detoxification of harmful drug is
function of:
(a) Smooth endoplasmic reticules
(b) Rough endoplasmic reticules
(c) Cristae of mitochondria
(d) Thylakoid of chloroplast
37. Protein production machinery is:
(a) Lysosomes (b) Ribosomes
(c) Glyoxisomes (d) Mitochondria

--- Page 4 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

38. Eukaryotic risosomes are produced 
and assembled in:
(a) Cytoplasm (b) Nucleolus
(c) Plastids (d) Golgi apparatus
39. Which RNA is required for protein 
synthesis?
(a) Ribosomal RNA
(b) Messenger RNA
(c) Transfer RNA
(d) All of these

40. Svedberg values are for which protein:
(a) Sedimentation
(b) Orientation
(c) Augmentation
(d) Fertilization
41. Which is not true for eukaryotic 
ribosomes:
(a) They are involved in protein synthesis
(b) They are produced in nucleolus
(c) They have Svedberg value of 70S
(d) They are composed of two subunits
42. F-1 particles on inner membrane of 
mitochondria are enzymes:
(a) ATP reductase
(b) ATP synthase
(c) Matrix catalase
(d) Protein synthase
43. Mitochondria in bounded by how 
many membranes:
(a) 1 (b) 2
(c) 3 (d) 4
44. Sites for cellular respiration are:

(a) Lungs (b) Mitochondria
(c) Ribosomes (d) Polysome
45. ATP is a form of which energy:
(a) Physical (b) Electrical
(c) Chemical (d) Analytical
46. Semifluid present inside the inner 
membrane space of chloroplast is 
called:
(a) Stroma (b) Matrix
(c) Lumen (d) Thylakoid

47. Non-green compartments of 
chloroplast are:
(a) Leucoplast (b) Grana
(c) Lamellae (d) Thylakoids
48. Which is common factor among 
mitochondria and chloroplast:
(a) Both have chlorophyll
(b) Both have dark reactions
(c) Both have DNA
(d) Both have centrioles
49. Which organelle is involved in the 
processing of proteins, carbohydrates 
and phospholipids prepared in the cell:
(a) Endoplasmic reticulum
(b) Ribosomes
(c) Golgi apparatus
(d) Leucoplast
50. In Pompe’s diseases lysosome lacks:
(a) Glycogen -digesting enzymes
(b) Lipids digesting enzymes
(c) Proteins digesting enzymes
(d) Glucose digesting enzymes
51. In Tay-Sachs, disease an essential 
enzyme is missing which digests:
(a) Protein (b) Starch
(c) Lipids (d) Vitamins
52. Which of the following is single 
membrane bound organelle:
(a) Peroxisome
(b) Mitochondria
(c) Golgi apparatus
(d) Nucleus
53. Zellweger syndrome is due to defect in:
(a) Lysosome (b) Ribosome
(c) Peroxisome (d) Glyoxisome
54. The organelle found only in plants is:
(a) Glyoxisomes (b) Lysosomes
(c) Ribosomes (d) Polysomes
55. During germination Glyoxisomes 
convert stored lipid into:
(a) Carbohydrates (b) Fats
(c) Proteins (d) Vitamins

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 5 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

56. Membrane of vacuole is called:
(a) Leucoplast (b) Tonoplast
(c) Chromoplast (d) Vacuoloplast
57. What is not true for centrioles:
(a) Found in plants
(b) Found in protist
(c) Occur in pairs
(d) Located at right angle to each other
58. Major components of cilia and flagella
are:
(a) Intermediate filament
(b) Microtubules
(c) Microfilaments
(d) Action filaments
59. Cilia and flagella are:
(a) Locomotory organs
(b) Excretory organ
(c) Sense organs
(d) Reproductive organ
60. The core of eukaryotic cilia and
flagella is called:
(a) Axoneme (b) Myomere
(c) Acroreme (d) Telomere
61. Basal body is present at the base of:
(a) Chromosomes
(b) Cilia
(c) Golgi vesicles
(d) liposomes
62. Prokaryotic flagella is built from the
protein:
(a) Pillin (b) Flagellin
(c) Actin (d) Myosin
63. Genetic material of both prokaryotic
and eukaryotic cell is made of:
(a) DNA (b) RNA
(c) Protein (d) Carbohydrate
64. Nucleoid is analogous structure to:
(a) Chromosomes (b) Nucleus
(c) Chromatid (d) Nucleolus
65. Sedimentation rate of complete
ribosome of a prokaryote is:
(a) 50S (b) 60S
(c) 70S (d) 80S

66. What is not true for prokaryotes:
(a) They divide by binary fission
(b) Mitosis and Meiosis is present in them
(c) Their ribosomes is of 70S
(d) Have cell wall of peptidoglycan
Cell Signalling
67. Receptor on the membrane of target
cell for signal reception is:
(a) Protein (b) Lipid
(c) Nucleotide (d) Phospholipid
68. Which molecule can act as second
messenger during signal transmission:
(a) Cyclic AMP
(b) Calcium ions
(c) Inositol triphosphate
(d) All of these
69. Cell signaling pathways involve the
transmissions of signals:
(a) From cell's exterior to interior
(b) From cell's interior to exterior
(c) From one cell to nearby cells
(d) From one cell to distant cells
70. Protein or peptide signalling molecules
can't pass through plasma membrane
because:
(a) They are large
(b) They are neutral
(c) They are soluble in water
(d) They are insoluble in water
71. Membrane transport mechanisms are
essential processes that enable cell:
(a) To maintain homeostasis
(b) Acquire nutrient
(c) Excretion
(d) All of these
Membrane transport mechanism
72. What is not true for facilitated
diffusion
(a) It involves transport-proteins
(b) It is from high concentration to low
(c) Energy is used in it
(d) It is passive transport

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 6 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

73. Which is true for channel proteins:
(a) They are hydrophilic
(b) They are hydrophobic
(c) They are fatty in nature
(d) They don't allow passage of specific
ions
74. Aquaporin allows rapid transport of:
(a) Water
(b) Oil
(c) Acid
(d) Base
75. Which process is used for purification
of water:
(a) Osmosis
(b) Reverse osmosis
(c) Diffusion
(d) Reverse diffusion
76. The membranes of nerve cells have
carrier proteins in the form of:
(a) $Na^+ - K^+$ pump
(b) $Na^+ - Cl^-$ pump
(c) $Ca^{++} - Mg^{++}$ pump
(d) $Na^+ - S^+$ pump
77. Intake of solid material is called:
(a) Phagocytosis (b) Pinocytosis
(c) Cytokinesis (d) Karyokinesis
Stem Cells
78. Cholesterol circulates in our blood as
(a) HDL
(b) LDL
(c) VHHL
(d) VLDL

79. Which stem cell can differentiate into
almost any cell!
(a) Totipotent (b) Multipotent
(c) Pluripotent (d) Unipotent
80. Totipotent cell can differentiate into:
(a) All possible cell types
(b) Almost any cell
(c) Few different types of cells
(d) One kind of cell
81. Adult muscle stem cells one example
of:
(a) Totipotent (b) Pluripotent
(c) Algopotent (d) Unipotent
82. Hematopoietic stem cells one example
of:
(a) Totipotent (b) Multipotent
(c) Oligopotent (d) Pluripotent
83. Uses of stem cell include:
(a) Regenerative medicine
(b) Drug testing
(c) Personalized medicine
(d) All of these
84. Inner cell mass of blastocysts are:
(a) Embryonic stem cell
(b) Adult stem cell
(c) Induced pluripotent stem cell
(d) Unipotent stem cell
85. Which of the following has ethical
controversies?
(a) Induced pluripotent stem cells
(b) Embryonic stem cell
(c) Adult stem cell
(d) Unipotent stem cell

                                     ANSWER KEY
| 1. | c | 2. | d | 3. | b | 4. | a | 5. | c | 6. | d | 7. | b |
| 8. | b | 9. | b | 10. | d | 11. | d | 12. | b | 13. | a | 14. | d |
| 15. | c | 16. | b | 17. | c | 18. | a | 19. | a | 20. | a | 21. | b |
| 22. | a | 23. | c | 24. | b | 25. | c | 26. | c | 27. | d | 28. | a |
| 29. | c | 30. | a | 31. | c | 32. | a | 33. | b | 34. | a | 35. | c |
| 36. | a | 37. | b | 38. | b | 39. | d | 40. | a | 41. | c | 42. | b |
| 43. | b | 44. | b | 45. | c | 46. | a | 47. | a | 48. | c | 49. | c |
| 50. | a | 51. | c | 52. | a | 53. | c | 54. | a | 55. | a | 56. | b |

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                 [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 7 ---
57. a 58. b 59. a 60. a 61. b 62. b 63. a
64. b 65. c 66. b 67. a 68. d 69. a 70. c
71. d 72. c 73. a 74. a 75. b 76. a 77. a
78. b 79. a 80. a 81. d 82. b 83. d 84. a
85. b

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch3 MCQ's.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [18/36]: 11th Bio New Ch3 Short Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 3: Cells & Subcellular Organelles

Short Questions

SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)

Q1. Compare the resolution and magnification of light microscope and electron microscope.
Ans. (a) Resolution of light microscope is 0.2 nm/ while its magnification is 1500X
(b) Resolution of electron microscope is 0.2 nm / while it can magnify objects upto 250,000 times.
Q2. State the cell theory. How we can validate it? What are the exceptions to cell theory?
Ans. 1. Cell theory: All living organisms are made of cell and cell products.
Three essential points of cell theory.
2. Cell theory can be validated by
(i) visualizing cell structure under microscope.
(ii) having live cell imaging and genetic studies.
(iii) By studying DNA sequencing and metabolic pathways.
(iv) By experiments such as cell culture studies and tissue engineering.
3. Exception to cell theory are
a) viruses because they are not made of cells and cannot carry out life processes independently
b) prions and viroids, because they show properties of living organisms but are not composed of cells.
c) Muscle cells in vertebrates.
d) Multinucleated organisms like certain fungi and algae.
e) Self replication of organelles like mitochondria and chloroplast.

Q3. The table below compares the process of diffusion, facilitated diffusion and active transport. Fill in the blank cells, using the words “YES” or “NO”.
Process
Description Simple Diffusion Facilitated Diffusion Active Transport
Is ATP required?
Are carrier proteins involved?
Is direction of transport always
from higher to lower concentration?

Ans.
Process
Description Simple Diffusion Facilitated Diffusion Active Transport
Is ATP required? NO NO YES
Are carrier proteins involved? NO YES YES
Is direction of transport always
from higher to lower concentration? YES YES NO

Q4. Categorize the organelles as (i) single membrane bounded, (ii) double membrane bounded and (iii) lacking any membrane.
Ans. (i) Single membrane bound organelles include Lysosomes, Peroxisomes, Glyoxisomes, Endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
(ii) Double membrane bound organelles include Mitochondria, Chloroplast, nucleus
(iii) organelles lacking any membrane are Ribosomes, centrioles, cytoskeleton, Nucleolus.
Q5. State two functions of the proteins in the plasma membrane.
Ans. (i) Transport: Some protein act as channels or carriers to transport substances like glucose or amino acids across membrane.
(ii) Cell signaling: Receptor proteins in membrane receive chemical signals from outside the cell and transmit into the cell for a response.
Q6. State two features that mitochondria have in common with prokaryotes.
Ans. Mitochondria have two features common with prokaryotes:
(i) Presence of circular DNA: Like prokaryotes, mitochondria contain their own circular DNA.
(ii) Self-replication: Mitochondria can self-replicate independent of the nucleus, similar to prokaryotes.
Q7. List three ways in which prokaryotic cells differ from eukaryotic cells.
Ans. 1. In Eukaryotic cells distinct nucleus is present, while absent in prokaryotes.
2. In Eukaryotic cells ribosomes are of 80S while in prokaryotic cells it is of 70S.
3. Mitosis and Meiosis are present in eukaryotic cells while absent in prokaryotic cells.
Q8. List the structures and molecules, which can cross the nuclear envelope.
Ans. a) Nuclear pores are permeable to small molecules.
b) Some large proteins like histones can also pass the nuclear membrane.
c) Ribosomal sub-units can also pass out through the nuclear membrane.

Q9. Distinguish each of the following pairs.
a. Exocytosis and endocytosis
b. Phagocytosis and pinocytosis
c. Peroxisome and glyoxysomes
Ans. a) Exocytosis and Endocytosis
| Exocytosis | Endocytosis |
| :--- | :--- |
| (i) In this process bulky material is exported out of cell. | (i) In this process bulky material, is moved into cell across plasma membrane. |
| (ii) In exocytosis, the bulky material is packed inside a membrane and vesicle is formed. This vesicle fuses with plasma membrane to release content to extra cellular environments. | (ii) Here, the plasma membrane engulfs the material forming a vesicle which detaches and moves into cytoplasm. |

b) Phagocytosis: In this cell takes in solid material.
Pinocytosis
| Phagocytosis | Pinocytosis |
| :--- | :--- |
| (i) it is a type of endocytosis in which cell takes in solid material. | (i) It is a types of endocytosis in which cell takes in liquids in the form of droplets. |
| (ii) It is also called as cell eating. | (ii) It is also called as cell drinking. |

c) Peroxisomes and Glyoxysomes:
| Peroxisomes | Glyoxysomes |
| :--- | :--- |
| (i) They are involved in break down fatty acids and detoxification of hydrogen peroxide. | (i) They convert stored lipids into carbohydrates during seed germination they are found only in plants cells and |

--- Page 3 ---
(ii) They are found are abundant in
in most lipid rich seeds.
(iii)Catalases and (ii) They contain
oxidases convert lipids
enzymes are into
present in carbohydrates.
them.
Q10. What are the main functions of
lysosomes?
Ans. Lysosomes are membrane bound
organelles that contain digestive enzymes to
breakdown macromolecules, damaged
organelles and foreign particles. They play
key role in intra cellular digestion and
recycling of cellular components, often
called as autophagy.
Q11. Describe the role of the Golgi body.

Ans.
(i) The Golgi body is involved in production
of cell secretions.
(ii) It converts protein and lipids into
glycoproteins and glycolipids.
(iii) In plant cells they produce pectin and
other polysaccharides needed for plant
structure and metabolism.
Q12. What are histones? Where are
these found in eukaryotic cells?
Ans. Histones are group of small proteins
DNA strand wraps around there histone
protein to form a structure called
nucleosome, which is part of chromatin.
Q13. What do you mean by “stem cell”?
What are the main usages of stem cells?

Ans. Stem cells are unique cells with
remarkable ability to develop into many
different cell types, such on muscle cell, red
blood cell or brain cell.
Usage: Stem cells can be used in
regeneration medicine, drug testing and
development of personalized medicine.

Q14. The following diagram shows the
structure of a mitochondrion. Name
structures A to G.
B
A C
D
E
F G
Ans.
A – DNA
B – Ribosomes
C – Matrix
D – Inner membrane
E – Outer membrane
F – F1 particle
G – Cristae
Q15. The diagram below shows an
electron micrograph of a cell.
a. Label the parts of the cell.
b. What evidence can be seen in the
diagram that suggests that the cell is
metabolically active and involved in
secretion of enzymes?
A Typical Animal Cell
Ans. a) Label
A Typical Animal Cell
Golgi bodies
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum
Nuclear membrane
Nucleolus
Chromatin
Nuclear pore
Nucleoplasm
Centriole
Plasma membrane
Lysosome
Vacuole
Cytoplasm
Mitochondrion
Ribosomes
(attached with ER)
Rough endoplasmic reticulum
Free ribosomes

--- Page 4 ---


--- Page 5 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Structure of Cell
Q23. What is protoplast?
Ans. When cell wall is removed, using cell
wall degrading enzymes the remaining
components of the cell are called a protoplast.

Cell Wall
Q24. What is primary wall. Give its
chemical composition?
Ans. Primary wall is the actual cell wall of
the cell. It is composed of polysaccharides
i.e. cellulose, hemi cellulose and pectin.
The cellulose microfibrils are aligned at
angles and are held together by hydrogen
bonds. Many proteins are also present in
primary walls.
Q25. What is secondary wall? Give its
chemical composition.
Ans. In some plant cells, after maturation a
secondary wall is made between protoplast
and primary wall. Secondary wall is
composed of lignin, cellulose and
hemicellulose. Due to presence of lignin,
secondary wall is more rigid than the primary
wall.
Q26. What are plasmodesmata?
Ans. Plasmodesmata are small channels
that directly connect the cytoplasm of
neighbouring plant cells to each other.
Plasmodesmata penetrate both the primary
and secondary walls. They allow movement
of materials between cells and so important
in cellular communication.
★Q27. How plasmodesmata are exception
to cell theory?
Ans. Plasmodesmata have caused debate
among scientists regarding cell theory. Some
scientists suggest that the cells of higher
plants are not really cells since they are not
physically separated or independent from one
another.

★Q28. What are diatoms? Write about
their cell walls.
Ans. The group of algae called diatoms
synthesize their cell walls from silicic acid.
The acid is polymerized inside cells, then the
wall is extruded to protect the cell. The
synthesis of Silica cell walls requires less
energy. That is why there are higher growth
rates in diatoms.
★Q29. Compare the cell wall composition
of algae, Fungi, Prokaryotes and
archaebacteria?
Ans. The cell wall of algae contains
cellulose and a variety of glycoproteins.
The cell wall of fungi is composed of chitin,
the same carbohydrate that gives strength to
the exoskeletons of insects.
The cell walls of prokaryotes (bacteria and
cyanobacteria) is composed of
peptidoglycan, that is a single large polymer
of amino acids and sugar.
The cell wall of archaebacteria is composed
of different polysaccharides and proteins,
with no peptidoglycan.

Plasma Membrane
Q30. What is fluid mosaic model?
Ans. Fluid mosaic model is widely
accepted concept that describes the dynamics
of plasma membrane. According to this
model, the basic foundation of plasma
membrane is a lipid bilayer. This bilayer is
made of phospholipids. A collection of
proteins floats within the lipid bilayer. In
lipid bilayer the hydrophobic lipid tails are
oriented inwards and the hydrophilic
phosphate groups are aligned outwards,
either towards the cytoplasm of cell or the
extracellular environment.
★Q31. What is significance of proteins in
the lipid bilayer of plasma membrane?
Ans. The interior of lipid bilayer sheet is
hydrophobic. It repels water-soluble

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 6 ---


--- Page 7 ---
Q39. What is cytosol?
Ans.
i. Cytosol is aqueous ground substance of cytoplasm, which contain various organelles and other inclusions.
ii. Cytosol contains water in which many organic (proteins, carbohydrates, lipids) and inorganic salts are completely or partially dissolved.
Q40. Name major components of cell?

Ans. Following are the major components of cell.
1 Plasma membrane 2. Cytoplasm
3. Nucleus

Nucleus
Q41. What is nuclear lamina?
Ans. On the inner side of nucleus envelope, there is a protein lining called nuclear lamina. It binds to chromatin to give it structural support.
Q42. What are nuclear pores? Give their composition.
Ans. Nuclear pores are tiny holes in the nuclear envelope. A nuclear pore is made of nuclear pore complex. It has several subunits i.e., annular subunit, Column subunit, ring subunit, luminal subunit.
★Q43. Describe types of chromatin?

Ans. There are two types of chromatin. Euchromatin is the genetically active chromatin involved in transcribing RNA to produce proteins. The other kind of chromatin is termed heterochromatin. Its DNA is genetically inactive.
Q44. What is NOR – (Nucleolus organizer region)?
Ans. These are certain sites of chromosomes that form Nucleoli. DNA found as NORs encodes the ribosomal RNA.

★Q45. Why single nucleus undergo division to give NORs?
Ans. In cells that produce large amounts of protein, and thus require significant numbers of ribosomes, the size of the nucleolus is considerable.
At the onset of mitosis, the single nucleolus present in cell disappears. and after division new nucleus is formed from the NORs.
Q46. Give components of Nucleolus?

Ans. Nucleolus consists of granular and fibrillar components and DNA. The granular part consists of ribosomal subunits. Fibrillar part is composed of raw materials of ribosome subunits.
★Q47. What is length of DNA in human cell?
Ans. Inside the nucleus of every human cell, there is a 6 feet long DNA. It is subdivided into 46 individual molecules (each 1.5 inches long), one for each chromosome.
Q48. What is nucleus? Mention its two major functions.
Ans. A prominent nucleus is present in all eukaryotic cells (at centre in animal cells while pushed to side in plant cells). It performs two major functions:
• It stores the cells hereditary material (DNA).
• Coordinates the cell's activities e.g., growth, protein synthesis and cell division.
★Q49. Which materials can pass into and out of nucleus.
Ans. Building blocks of DNA and RNA and ATPs are allowed to enter into the nucleus. Ribosomal subunits which are build in nucleoli are the examples of materials that are allowed to leave the nucleus and enter the cytoplasm.
Q50. What is nucleoplasm?
Ans. Nucleoplasm is the semifluid matrix found inside the nucleus. Within the

--- Page 8 ---


--- Page 9 ---


--- Page 10 ---


--- Page 11 ---
become inactive and the cell remains
uninjured.
Q79. How many enzymes are present in
lysosomes and where they are made?

Ans. Lysosomes have 40 different
hydrolytic enzymes. All of these enzymes are
manufactured in endoplasmic reticulum and
modified in Golgi apparatus. The membrane
covering of lysosomes protect the rest of cell
from there possible damage.
Q80. Define lysosomal storage diseases.
Give examples.
Ans. In lysosomal storage diseases the
patient lacks one of the hydrolytic enzymes
of lysosomes. Due to this the abnormal
lysosomes gets filled with the indigestible
substances, which interfere with cellular
functions e.g., Pompe's disease and Tay
sacks disease.
Q81. What is Pompe's disease?
Ans. This is type of lysosomal storage
disease. In this lysosome lack glycogen
digesting enzyme. So, harmful amounts of
glycogen accumulate in liver cells.
Q82. What is Tay Sach's disease.
Ans. In this essential lipid digesting
enzyme is missing. So accumulation of lipids
in nerve cells of brain damages the nervous
system causing mental retardation and death
in early childhood.
Q83. What role lysosomes play in
development process?
Ans. Selective cell death is done by
lysosomes during development e.g., when
tadpole develops into a frog the cells of tail
are destroyed by the enzymes of lysosomes.
★Q84. How cell is not affected by enzymes
of lysosomes?
Ans. The cell is safe from the enzymes of
lysosomes. These enzymes require acidic
environment (of pH of about 4.8). The
lysosomal matrix is acidic but cytosol is a
neutral environment. So, even if a lysosome

is ruptured, its digestive enzymes become
inactive and the cell remains uninjured.
★Q85. How lysosomes were discovered?

Ans. In the mid-18th century, Belgian
scientist Christian Rene de Duve was
investigating carbohydrate metabolism in
liver cells. He observed that when cells are
damaged in the centrifuge, they release acid
phosphatase. He suggested that this digestive
enzyme was encased in some membrane
bounded organelle within the cell, which he
named as lysosome.
★Q86. What role is played by lysosomes
during brain development?
Ans. Many cells in your brain die during
development. This directed suicide is
accomplished by the rupture of the lysosomes
within the cells that are being eliminated.

Peroxisomes and Glyoxisomel

Q87. What are peroxisomes? Give their
primary function?
Ans. Peroxisomes are single membrane
bound organelles found in all eukaryotic
cells. They contain variety of enzymes whose
function is to get rid the cell of toxic
substances. E.g., Hydrogen peroxide, a
common toxic by product of cellular
metabolism is broken down to water and
oxygen.
Q88. What is function of catalase enzyme
in peroxisome?
Ans. The catalase enzymes break down
hydrogen peroxide, a common by-product of
cellular metabolism into water and oxygen.
H₂O₂ ⎯Catalase⎯→ 2 H₂O + O₂
(Hydrogen peroxide) (Water) (Oxygen)
Q89. What is Zellweger Syndrome?

Ans. Zellweger syndrome is one of the
metabolic disorder caused due to defect in
peroxisome. In this syndrome number of
peroxisomes in a cell is less or absent. This is

--- Page 12 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

congenital disorder (present at birth) and has
no cure or effective treatment hence causing
early death.
Q90. What are Glyoxisomes? Give their
function.
Ans. Glyoxisomes are similar to
peroxisomes but found only in plant cells.
These contain enzymes that convert lipids
into carbohydrates in the cells of lipid-rich
seeds e.g caster bean this provides energy to
germinating seeds.
Vacuoles
Q91. What are vacuoles? Give their
important functions.
Ans. Vacuoles are membrane – bound sacs
in cytoplasm, their functions are
1. In mature plant cells, they provide
structural support.
2. It serves as storage, waste disposal etc.
Q92. How large vacuole is formed in
plant cells?
Ans. Many plant cells have a large, single
central vacuole. This large vacuole slowly
develops by fusion of smaller vacuoles. It
takes up 80% or more space in the cell.
Q93. Give role of central vacuole in plant
cells.
Ans. The central vacuole in plant cells
plays an important structural role for the
plant. This role of vacuole is relate to its
ability to control turgor pressure. Turgor
pressure makes the rigidity of the cell. This
also helps maintain the structural integrity of
the plant along with the support from the cell
wall.
★Q94.How is single large vacuole is
formed?
Ans. Vacuoles are fluid filled single-
membrane bounded organelles. Cells have
many small vacuoles in their cytoplasm.
However, when a plant cell matures its small
vacuoles fuse to form a single large vacuole.

★Q95. What is importance of materials
stored in vacuoles for humans?
Ans. Several materials commonly stored in
plant vacuoles have been found to be useful
for humans, such as opium, rubber, and garlic
flavouring.
Q96. Write role of vacuole other than
turgor pressure.
Ans. 1. Vacuoles also often store the
pigments that give certain flowers their
colors, which aid them in attraction of bees
and other pollinators.
2. Vacuoles also release molecules that are
poisonous to various insects and animal thus
discouraging them from consuming the plant.
Centrioles
★Q97.What are centrioles. Give their
composition and location in eukaryotic
cells.
Ans. Centrioles are hollow and cylindrical
organelles associated with assembly and
organization of fibres of cytoskeleton i.e.
microtubules. A centriole is made of nine
triplets of microtubules.
Location: In eukaryotic cells centrioles
occur in pairs located at right angle to one
another near the nuclear envelope.
Q98. What is basal body?
Ans. Each cilium and flagellum is
anchored by a modified centriole known as
basal body.
Q99. How spindle fibres are formed in
plants and fungi?
Ans. The cells of plants and fungi lack
centrioles and basal bodies. Their
microtubules and spindle fibres are organized
from the structures of cytoplasm like
MTOCs, microtubule organizing centres.
Q100. Write function of centrioles?
Ans. In animal and protist cells centrioles
are organelles associated.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 13 ---
1. With the assembly and organization of
fibres of cytoskeleton i.e. microtubules.
2. They are also involved in the formation
of cilia and flagella.
Q101. What is cytoskeleton? Give names
of its types.
Ans. It is a network of protein fibres
present in cytoplasm. It has following types
• Microfilaments
• Microtubules
• Intermediate filaments
Q102. What are microfilaments? Give
their functions.
Ans. Microfilaments are solid rods made of
globular protein called actin. Function: They
help dividing cell to pinch off into two cells.
In association with myosin, microfilaments
help in cellular contraction.
Q103. What are microtubules? Give their
function.
Ans. These are straight, hollow cylinders
composed of subunits made of tubulin
proteins
Function:-
1. Microtubules are major components of
cilia and flagella.
2. They participate in the formation of
spindle fibres during cell division.
Q104. What are intermediate filaments?
Give their functions.
Ans. These are made of different proteins
made of vimentin subunit.
Functions
1. They maintain cell shape and rigidity.
2. They also anchor (fix) several organelles
in the cell.
Q105. What are cilia and flagella? Give
their function and difference.
Ans. Cilium and flagellum are thin, tail like
projections extending from cell body.
Difference: Cilia are short in length and
usually many in number, while flagella are
longer but less in number
Function: Their function is locomotory
organs.
Q106. What is axoneme? Give its
structure.
Ans. Axoneme is the core of eukaryotic
cilia and flagella.
Structure: It contains two central
microtubules that are surrounded by an outer
ring of nine doublet microtubules. Dynein
molecules bridge the gap between adjacent
microtubule doublets. This organization is
also called as “9+2” structure.
Q107. Where cilia are present in humans?
Write their function.
Ans. In humans cilia are found in the lining
of the trachea where they sweep mucus and
dirt out of the breathing tube.
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
Q108. What is nucleoid?
Ans. A prokaryotic cell lacks a nucleus.
The DNA of prokaryotic cell is present in the
more or less central region known as
Nucleoid (Nucleus like).
Q109. What is composition of cell wall of
prokaryotic cell? Also write its location.
Ans. Surrounding the plasma membrane of
most of prokaryotic cells is a cell wall but it
does not contain cellulose. It is composed of
peptidoglycan, which is a single large
polymer of amino acids and sugar.
Q110. Compare size and cell division in
eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells.
Ans. Cell size: It is 10 – 100µm in
eukaryotic cells and 1 – 10 µm in prokaryotic
cells.
Cell division: In eukaryotes mitosis and
meiosis occurs while in prokaryotic cells
mitosis and meiosis are missing. Here cell
divides by direct division called as binary
fission.

--- Page 14 ---


--- Page 15 ---


--- Page 16 ---


--- Page 17 ---
LONG QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)
Q1. Write details of the structure and
the chemical composition of cell walls of
eukaryotes and prokaryotes.
Ans. See Q6. and Q8. of theory.
Q2. Explain the chemical composition
and the functions of plasma membrane.
Ans. See Q9. of theory.
Q3. Identify the role of glycolipids and
glycoproteins as the cell surface makers.
Ans. See Q9. of theory.
Q4. Explain the structure, chemical
composition and function of ribosomes.
Ans. See Q13. of theory.
Q5. Explain the structure, and
functions of Golgi complex.
Ans. See Q16. of theory.
Q6. Describe the structure, chemical
composition and function of chromosome.
Ans. See Q11. of theory. 11403263
Q7. Discuss nuclear envelope and
nuclear pore complex in detail.
Ans. See Q11. of theory.
Q8. Explain how Golgi apparatus is
involved in making cell secretions.
Ans. See Q16. of theory.
Q9. Describe the structure and
functions of smooth and rough
endoplasmic reticulum.
Ans. See Q12. of theory.

Q10. Explain the role of lysosomes and
peroxisomes in regulating the amounts of
cellular contents.
Ans. See Q17. and Q18. of theory.
Q11. Describe the structures of the three
fibres that make the cytoskeleton.
Ans. See Q21. of theory.
Q12. Describe the formation and
functions of lysosomes.
Ans. See Q17 of theory.
Q13. Compare mitochondria and
chloroplasts as the organelles that are
involved in cellular energetics.
Ans. See Q14. and Q15. of theory.
Q14. Describe the basic structure of
mitochondrion, from outside inward.
Ans. See Q14. of theory.
Q15. Describe the pathway of protein
signal and steroid signal from outside of a
cell to inside.
Ans. See Q26. of theory.
Q16. Categorize and explain different
types of stem cells.
Ans. See Q31 of theory.
Q17. What are the advantages and
disadvantages of using induced
Pluripotent Stem Cells?
Ans. See Q32. of theory.

INQUISITIVE QUESTIONS
Q1. If a researcher observes that a certain cell type has an exceptionally large Golgi
apparatus, what can be inferred about the function of this cell?
Ans. If a cell type has an exceptionally large Golgi apparatus, it means that this cell is
physiologically very active e.g., pancreatic cells that produce digestive enzymes have large
Golgi apparatus.
Q2. If a signalling molecule is lipid-soluble, like a steroid hormone, what is the most
likely mechanism for its action within the target cell?
Ans. After entering into the target cell it binds to the specific intracellular receptors. This
binding results in the formation of active receptor hormone complex which moves into the
nucleus and binds to specific DNA sequence to regulate the transcription of genes.

--- Page 18 ---

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch3 Short Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [19/36]: 11th Bio New Ch4 Long Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
Unit 4: Biomolecules

Long Questions

DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONS

BIOLOGICAL MOLECULES

Q.1: How does biochemistry integrate the study of major chemical components that play role in sustaining life?
Ans. Definition: Biochemistry is the study of chemical components and chemical processes. occurring in living organism.
Importance of studying biochemistry: All structures of living organisms have biochemical organization and all functions occurring in them are due to biochemical processes taking place in this organization.
• Therefore, a basic knowledge of biochemistry is helpful to understand anatomy and physiology of living organisms. Photosynthesis, respiration, digestion, contraction etc. can be described in biochemical terms.
Chemical composition of protoplasm:
• The molecules synthesized by cells and containing carbon are known as organic molecules. They occur naturally only in the bodies of living organisms or in their products and remains.
• Carbohydrates, proteins, lipids and nucleic acids are important organic molecules in living organisms.
• Inorganic molecules: Life on Earth evolved in water, and all life still depends on water At least 80% of the mass of living organisms (protoplasm) is water, and almost all chemical reactions of life take place in aqueous solutions.
• The other chemicals that make up living things are mostly organic macromolecules and certain inorganic molecules.
• Dry mass composition of biomolecules: They make 93% of the dry mass of living organisms. The remaining 7% comprises of small organic molecules (like vitamins) and inorganic molecules (like carbon dioxide, acids, bases, and salts).

| Percentage of major organic molecules in the dry mass of |
| :--- | :--- |
| Group Name | % Dry Mass |
| Proteins | 50 |
| Nucleic acids | 18 |
| Carbohydrates | 15 |
| Lipids | 10 |

★ Note: All questions and paragraphs marked with a star ★ are explanations of the Box Information provided in the textbook.

--- Page 2 ---
• Role of organic macromolecules: Most of the organic molecules are large in size and
biologists call them macromolecules. Many macromolecules are in the form of
polymers.
A polymer is a molecule consisting of many identical molecular units, called monomers.
Important macromolecules like carbohydrates, proteins, and nucleic acids are the polymers
of simple monomers i.e., sugars, amino acids and nucleotides respectively.
★ Metabolism: All the chemical reactions taking place within a cell are collectively
called metabolism. The processes in metabolism may be either anabolism or
catabolism.
• In anabolism, simpler substances are combined to form complex substances.
• In catabolism complex molecules are broken down into simpler ones.
★ Functional group: Organic molecules have carbon-based core with special groups of
atoms attached. These groups are called functional groups. For example, OH, CO,
COOH, NH2 etc. Most biochemical reactions involve the transfer of a functional group
from one molecule to another, or the breaking of carbon-carbon bond.
TYPES OF BONDS IN BIOLOGY
Q.2: Compare and contrast the different types of bonds involved in making living
systems. Co-relate importance of carbon in different types of bonds involved in making
living system.
Ans. Different types of bonds and interactions play vital roles in the structure and function
of biological molecules.
Importance of carbon: Carbon is the basic element of organic molecules. It is tetravalent
and can react with many other known elements like H, O, N, P and S. Carbon and hydrogen
bond (C-H bond) is the potential source of chemical energy for cellular activities.
• Carbon-oxygen association in glycosidic linkages provides stability to the complex
carbohydrate molecules.
• Carbon combines with nitrogen in amino acid linkages to form peptide bonds and forms
proteins which are very important due to their diversity in structure and functions.
Bonds
1. Covalent Bonds: Covalent bonds form when two atoms share electrons.
Significance: These bonds are often found in organic molecules like proteins and nucleic
acids, providing stability to the molecules.
Fig: Covalent bond between two atoms
2. Ionic Bonds: Ionic bonds are formed when one atom donates an electron (becomes a
positive ion, or cation) and another atom accepts the electron (becomes a negative ion, or

--- Page 3 ---
anion). The electrostatic attraction between these oppositely charged ions forms the ionic
bond.
Significance: Ionic bonds are relatively strong in the solid state and are formed mostly in
inorganic molecules like sodium chloride.
[Image of atomic structure]
Fig: Ionic bond between sodium and chloride atoms
3. Hydrogen Bond: Hydrogen bonds are weak
attractions that occur between a hydrogen atom and
an electronegative atom (such as oxygen or
nitrogen).
Significance: These bonds are important in
maintaining the structure of large molecules like
proteins and nucleic acids, as well as in various
biological processes like DNA replication.
4. Hydrophobic Interactions: Hydrophobic
interactions occur between nonpolar molecules and
polar molecules (like water). Nonpolar molecules
tend to cluster together in aqueous environments to
minimize contact with water molecules.
[Image of water molecules]
Fig: Hydrogen bonds between
water molecules
Significance: This phenomenon is crucial for the folding of proteins and the formation of
lipid bilayers in cell membranes.
5. Hydrophilic Interactions: Hydrophilic interactions occur between polar molecules and
water molecules.
Significance: These interactions are essential for the dissolution of polar and ionic
compounds in water. These interactions help in various biological processes such as nutrient
transport and chemical reactions within cells.
CONDENSATION (SYNTHESIS) AND HYDROLYSIS
Q.3: Describe and draw sketch of dehydration synthesis and hydrolysis reactions.
Ans. Condensation
• All the biomolecules join their monomers by condensation or dehydration process.
• During condensation, an -OH group is removed from one monomer and a-H atom is
removed from another monomer.
• It is also known as dehydration synthesis because the removal of OH and H groups
means the removal of a water molecule.
★Need of energy: Energy is required to break chemical bonds when water is extracted
from monomers. So, cells must supply energy to make macromolecules.
Example
• The formation of maltose by two glucose monomers is an example of a condensation
reaction.

--- Page 4 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Glucose Glucose Maltose
OH O OH OH O OH
Water
Fig: Making macromolecules (Dehydration synthesis)
Hydrolysis
• Hydrolysis is a chemical process in which macromolecule (polymer) is broken down into smaller fragments by the addition of water molecules.
• It is the reverse of dehydration synthesis.
• Cells break bonds between monomers by adding water to them.
• In this process, OH group from a water molecule joins to one monomer and hydrogen joins to the second monomer.
★ This breakdown of macromolecules is essential in various biological processes, such as digestion and cellular respiration, where smaller molecules are needed for energy production.
Example
• Breakdown of maltose into two glucose monomers by the addition of a water molecule is an example of hydrolysis.
Maltose Glucose Glucose
OH O OH OH O OH
Water
Fig: Breaking of macromolecules (Hydrolysis)

IMPORTANCE OF WATER
Q.4: Explain how the properties of water makes the medium of life?
Ans. Water is an oxide of hydrogen having chemical formula H2O. This seemingly simple molecule has many surprising properties, which give it the status of “the medium of life”.
• About two third of our bodies are composed of water and we cannot exist without it.
• In fact, it is the most abundant compound found in all organisms.
• Its concentration varies from 65 to 89 percent in different organisms.
1. Solvent Properties
• The ability of water to dissolve a wide variety of substances is due to its two properties, the polarity of
Fig: Hydrogen bonds among water molecules

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 5 ---
water molecules and the ability of water molecules to form hydrogen bonds.
★ Significance: Hydrogen bonds help in maintaining the three-dimensional structures of proteins and the double helix structure of DNA.
• The water molecule has distinct ends, each with a partial charge. Hydrogen atom is partially positive and oxygen atom is partially negative. Such molecules are called polar molecules.
• Partial negative charge at one end of a water molecule is attracted to partial positive of another water molecule. This weak attraction is called a hydrogen bond. Water forms a network of such bonds. Many of the properties of water are due to hydrogen bonds in water.
• Charged or polar molecules are soluble in water. In the state of solution, ions and water molecules can react with each other easily. So water provides a medium for metabolism.
2. Hydrophobic Exclusion
Non-polar or uncharged molecules are insoluble in water because water molecules do not make hydrogen bonds with them. When they are placed in water, water molecules move them out. The insoluble molecules make hydrophobic associations with one another.
For example, lipids molecules are insoluble in water. When they are excluded from water, they make strong associations among themselves. Therefore, lipids help to maintain membranes of cells.
3. Heat Capacity
Definition: Specific heat capacity is defined as the number of calories (amount of heat) required to raise the temperature of 1 gram of a substance from 15°C to 16°C (i.e., 1°C).
Specific heat capacity of water: Water has a high specific heat capacity i.e., 4.184 Joules. It means that water has great ability to absorb and releasing heat with minimum change in its own temperature. Most of the heat energy absorbed by water is used to break hydrogen bonds between its molecules.
Significance: Due to this breakage of hydrogen bonds, individual water molecules start moving more freely and temperature of water rises.
Temperature Stabilizer: Due to high specific heat capacity, water heats up more slowly. Similarly, when it is given a cooler environment, it holds its temperature longer Water thus works as temperature stabilizer not only for organisms' internal environment but also for their external environment.
4. Heat of Vaporization
Definition: It is the amount of heat required to change a liquid to gas.
Specific heat of vaporization of water: Water has high heat of vaporization. So, it absorbs much heat while changing from liquid state to gas. Its heat of vaporization is 574 Kcal/kg which means a considerable amount of heat energy (574 Kcal) is required to change 1kg of liquid water into vapours.

--- Page 6 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Significance (Cooling Effect)
• Due to heat of vaporization of water, Earth's temperature is kept moderate for the
  sustenance of life.
• Heat of vaporization of water also provides cooling effects to plants when they transpire
  and animals when they perspire (sweat).
• Every gram of water that evaporates from plant or animals' body surface removes 574
  calories of heat from the body.
5. Cohesion
Definition: The force of attraction between same type of
molecules is called cohesion. Hydrogen bonds among
water molecules enable them to "stick together".
Significance: Inside water, molecules have high cohesion.
• The cohesion of water is important for living world.
  Plants depend on cohesion among water molecules for
  the transport of water and nutrients from roots to
  leaves.
• The evaporation of water from a leaf exerts a pulling
  force on water within xylem vessels of the leaf.
  Because of this cohesion, the force is relayed through
  xylem vessels all the way down to roots. As a result,
  water rises against the force of gravity. Hydrogen bonds
  also giber water high surface tension. Water behaves as if it were coated with some
  invisible film. The insect water strider walks on water without breaking surface.
6. Ionization of Water
• When the covalent bonds among the atoms of water molecule break, water is ionized to
  form hydrogen ions (H+) and hydroxyl ions (OH-). At normal conditions, this reaction is
  reversible and equilibrium is maintained.
• At room temperature (25°C), in a litre of water one molecule out of each 550 million is
  ionized and thus the concentration of each of H+ and OH- in pure water remains at 10-7
  moles/litre.
★ Acids combine with OH- ions, leaving H+ ions in medium and make medium acidic.
  Similarly, bases combine with H+ ions, leaving OH- ions in medium, and make medium
  basic.
Significance: H+ and OH- ions take part in many chemical reactions in the cells e.g.,
hydrolysis of macromolecules. Relative concentrations of H+ and OH- ions determine the
acidity and alkalinity of medium i.e., pH of
medium. The pH affects the biochemical
reactions. Enzymes work best at specific pH.
7. Density of water
• Water exhibits its maximum density at 4°C.
  Its density decreases when the temperature
  lowers. It is because of the hydrogen bonds
  which keep water molecules relatively far
  apart.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 7 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

• When temperature falls to 0°C, water freezes but the resulting ice is less dense than
liquid water, because at this temperature, hydrogen bonding keeps water molecules
further apart than in liquid water.
Significance: In rivers, streams or lakes, ice is formed on the surface water due to falling of
temperature. As ice is less dense than water, it floats on surface. It acts as an insulator and
does not allow heat to escape from the water beneath it. In this way aquatic organisms are
protected.
Q.5: Summarize the properties of water, which are crucial for life in a tabulated
form.
Ans.
Properties of water and benefits to life
Properties                                Bonding                                Benefits to life
Best Solvent                              Polarity                               Provides medium for chemical
                                                                                 reactions
Maximum heat capacity                     Hydrogen bonding                       Keeps temperature constant
                                                                                 internally and externally for
                                                                                 organism
Maximum density at 4°C                    Change in hydrogen bonding             Ice floats on water
High heat of vaporization                 Hydrogen bonding                       Moderates Earth’s temperature
Ionization                                Covalent bond breaks                   Determine the acidity and
                                                                                 alkalinity of medium
Cohesion                                  Polarity, Hydrogen bonding             Water and nutrients are
                                                                                 transported from roots to leaves

                                     CARBOHYDRATES
Q.6: Define carbohydrates. Describe the properties and roles of monosaccharides
with classification.
Ans. Carbohydrates
Carbohydrate are naturally occurring organic compounds. The word “carbohydrate” literally
means “hydrated carbon”. Carbohydrates are synthesized as the primary products of
photosynthesis. During photosynthesis, when reduction of CO2 occurs, the resulting
carbohydrate molecule contains carbon, hydrogen and oxygen in the molar ratio of 1:2:1.
Empirical formula: Their empirical formula is C(H2O)n where ‘n’ is the number of carbon
atoms.
Classification of Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are classified into three groups:
• Monosaccharides
• Disaccharides
• Polysaccharides
Monosaccharides: Monosaccharides (simple sugars) are made of single sugar molecule.
They are easily soluble in water.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                    [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 8 ---
Classification: They may have 3 - 7 carbon atoms. They are further classified into
subgroups on the basis of number of carbon atoms.
• Pentoses and hexoses are most common and found in all living organisms.
• Hexoses play central role in energy storage.
• The primary energy-storage molecule is glucose with 7 energy-storing CH bonds.
• Its empirical formula is CH2O.

| Classification of monosaccharides | | | |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Monosaccharides** | **Carbon Atoms** | **Formula** | **Examples** |
| Trioses | 3 | C3H6O3 | Glyceraldehyde, Dihydroxyacetone |
| Tetroses | 4 | C4H8O4 | Erythrose, Erythrulose (intermediate in photosynthesis in bacteria) |
| Pentoses | 5 | C5H10O5 | Ribose, Deoxyribose (C5H10O4), Ribulose |
| Hexoses | 6 | C6H12O6 | Glucose, Fructose, Galactose |
| Heptoses | 7 | C7H14O7 | Rare in nature (intermediate in photosynthesis) |

Q.7: Compare the structural isomers and stereoisomers of glucose. / Describe
isomerism in monosaccharides and brief about their behavior in solution and
crystalline forms.
Ans. Isomers: The molecules which have the same number of atoms (same molecular
formula) but differ in how the atoms are arranged (different structural formula) are called
isomers of each other.
For example, glucose is not the only monosaccharide with the formula C6H12O6. Fructose
and galactose also have the same molecular formula but their structural formulas are
different. The structural and orientation differences have important consequences in the
making of polymers.
Fructose: In fructose, the double-bonded oxygen is attached to an internal carbon (no. 2)
rather than to a terminal one. In other words, glucose and fructose are structural isomers.
Glucose and galactose have a difference in the orientation of one hydroxyl (OH) group at
carbon no. 4. It means that glucose and galactose are stereoisomers.

Fig: Open-chain / Fischer projection of glucose

--- Page 9 ---
Fischer projection: The Fischer projection was devised by German Chemist Emil Fischer
in 1891. In a Fischer projection the carbohydrate is shown in its open chain form, rather
than a cyclical one.
Haworth Projection: The Haworth projection is named after British Chemist Sir Norman
Haworth. It shows sugars in their cyclic forms.
Ring (Haworth) Structures of Monosaccharides
When in solution, most of the monosaccharides form ring structures. Ring formation occurs
when an oxygen-bridge develops between two carbon atoms of the same sugar molecule.

In case of glucose, oxygen-bridge develops between carbon
number 1 and 5. So, a six cornered ring is formed.

In galactose too, oxygen-bridge is formed between carbon
number 1 and 5. It again gives a six-cornered ring.

In fructose, oxygen-bridge is formed between carbon number
2 and 5. So, a five cornered ring is formed.

When ribose goes in solution, oxygen-bridge develops
between carbon number 1 and 4. So, a five cornered ring is
formed.

Alpha (α) and Beta (β) D-glucose
There are two forms of D-glucose i.e., alpha D-
glucose and beta D-glucose. They differ only in the
direction of OH groups on carbon 1.
• The α D-glucose has OH group on the lower side
while the β D-glucose has OH on above side.
When many alpha-D-glucose molecules joint
together, they form a polymer called starch.
• When many beta-D-glucose molecules join
together, they form a polymer called cellulose.

--- Page 10 ---
Q.8: Distinguish the properties and roles of disaccharides.
Ans.
• Disaccharides are made from two monosaccharides by the process of dehydration synthesis. The covalent bond between two monosaccharides is called glycosidic bond.
• On hydrolysis, they yield monosaccharide monomers, of which they are made.
• As compared to monosaccharides, they are less soluble in water.
• Physiologically important disaccharides are maltose, lactose and sucrose.
• All disaccharides have molecular formula C12H22O11.
1. Maltose (Malt Sugar)
It is made up of two glucose monomers. The glucose molecules are attached by 1,4-glycosidic bond between carbon 1 of one and carbon 4 of the other glucose.
• It is found in many cereals (wheat, corn etc.). It is also formed (as an intermediate product) during the digestion of starch.

Fig: Dehydration synthesis of one maltose by condensation of two glucose

2. Lactose (Milk Sugar)
• It is made up of one glucose and one galactose subunit i.e., it is galactose 1-4 glucose. It is found only in mammalian milk.
• It is the main source of energy for infant mammals.
3. Sucrose (Cane Sugar-Table Sugar)
• It is made up of one glucose and one fructose subunits i.e., it is glucose 1-2 fructose.
• It is the most familiar disaccharide and is also known as table sugar.
• It acts as a sweetener in our food.
• Its molecular formula is (C12H22O11).
• It is also found in phloem vessels of higher plants where it acts as a transport product for the conduction of glucose to and from different parts of plant. That is why it is also known as transport disaccharide.

Fig: Structure of lactose

Fig: Structure of sucrose

--- Page 11 ---
Q.9: Describe the important polysaccharides and their importance.
Ans. Polysaccharides are the most complex and most abundant carbohydrates found in nature. They are long chains of many monosaccharides joined together by glycosidic bonds.
There are three important polysaccharides:
1. Starch
Starch is the plant storage polysaccharide. It is insoluble and forms starch granules inside many plant cells. Because it is insoluble, it does not change water potential of plant cells. So, it does not cause the cells to take up water by osmosis.
Starch is not a pure substance, but is a mixture of amylose and amylopectin.
• Amylose is a chain made of glucose monomers (with 1,4-glycosidic linkages). It is straight and unbranched. However, it tends to coil up into a helix.
• Amylopectin is also a chain of glucose monomers (with 1,4-glycosidic linkages). It also has branches (with 1,6-glycosidic linkages). In this way, it has more ends that can be broken more quickly by amylase enzymes. Both amylase and amylopectin are broken down by the enzyme amylase into maltose, though at different rates.
2. Glycogen
It is similar in structure to amylopectin. It is a chain of glucose monomers (with 1,4-glycosidic linkages) with branches (with 1,6-glycosidic linkages). It is made by animals as their storage polysaccharide, and is found mainly in muscles and liver. Because it is so highly branched, it can be broken down to glucose very quickly.

Fig: (a) Amylose, (b) amylopectin and (c) Glycogen

3. Cellulose
Cellulose is found in plants, where it is the main component of cell walls. It is a chain of glucose monomers (with 1,4-glycosidic linkages), but with a different isomer of glucose. Starch and glycogen contain alpha-glucose, in which OH group on carbon 1 sticks down from the ring, while cellulose contains beta-glucose, in which OH group on carbon 1 sticks up. This means that in cellulose, alternate glucose molecules are inverted.

Fig: Structure of starch and cellulose

--- Page 12 ---
This apparently tiny difference makes a huge difference in structure and properties. The
alpha 1-4 glucose polymer in starch coils up to form granules. On the other hand, the beta 1-
4 glucose polymer in cellulose forms straight chains.
Hundreds of these chains are linked together by hydrogen bonds to form cellulose
microfibrils. These microfibrils make cellulose fibrils. They are very strong and rigid, and
give strength to plant cells, and therefore to young plants and also to materials such as paper,
cotton etc.
★Cellulase: The beta-glycosidic bond cannot be broken by amylase. It requires a specific
cellulase enzyme. Some bacteria and some protozoans are only organisms that possess
cellulase enzyme. Herbivore animals, like cows and termites whose diet is mainly cellulose,
have mutualistic bacteria in their guts. These bacteria digest their cellulose. Humans cannot
digest cellulose, and it is referred to as dietary fibre.
4. Chitin
It is a modified form of cellulose. It is found in the exoskeletons of crabs, lobsters and
insects. It also makes the cell wall of fungi. Like cellulose, it is also a polymer of glucose.
The linkage between glucose monomers is also like that found in cellulose. However, in
chitin each glucose molecule has been modified by the addition of a nitrogen-containing
group. Only few organisms can digest it.

Fig: A part of chitin molecule
5. Pectin and Lignin: They are also the polysaccharides used as building material. They are
present in the cell walls of plant cells.
6. Agar: It is found in the cell walls of red algae. It is used as a thickener in foods. It is
also used as a medium on which bacteria and fungi are grown in laboratories.
7. Murein: It is a sugar-peptide polymer and is found in the cell walls of prokaryotes.
PROTEINS
Q.10: Define proteins and amino acids describe types of amino acids. / Define proteins
and amino acids and outline the synthesis and breakage of peptide linkages.
Ans. Proteins: Proteins are the polymers formed by the inter-linkage of monomers called
amino acids. The most abundant organic compounds in cell. Different proteins may have a
few to 3000 amino acids in their make-up (e.g., Insulin has 51 amino acids, Haemoglobin
has 574 amino acids).

--- Page 13 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

★ Diversity of protein: The diversity in biological world is the
reflection of the diversity of structure and function that exists in
proteins.
Composition of Amino acid: Amino acid is the basic structural
unit of proteins. It is an organic molecule, in which four groups;
an amino group (NH₂), a carboxyl group (COOH), a hydrogen
group (H) and a side group (R); are attached to the same carbon
atom (alpha carbon).
Occurrence and types: Although many different amino acids
occur in nature, about 170 types of amino acids have been reported to occur in living
organisms (in cells and tissues). Of these, about 25 types of amino acids may take part as
building units of proteins. Most of the proteins are, however, made of 20 types of amino
acids.
Identity and uniqueness: The identity and unique chemical properties of each amino acid
are determined by the nature of its side group (R), covalently bonded to alpha carbon. For
example, R may be a hydrogen atom as in glycine, or CH₃ as in alanine, or any other group.
Essential and Non-essential Amino acids
Out of 20 amino acids, our bodies can make eleven amino acids. These are called non-
essential amino acids and include alanine, arginine, asparagine, aspartic acid, cysteine,
glutamic acid, glutamine, glycine, proline, serine, and tyrosine. The remaining nine amino
acids cannot make our bodies on its own and must obtain these amino acids by eating
various foods. These are called essential amino acids and include methionine, valine,
tryptophan, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, threonine, phenylalanine and histidine (necessary
only for babies).
Peptide bond and dehydration synthesis: A covalent bond that links two amino acids is
known as a peptide bond. Each amino acid has an amino group at one end and a carboxyl
group at the other end. When two amino acids are brought closer, dehydration synthesis
occurs between the amino group of one and the carboxyl group of second amino acid. It
results in the release of a molecule of water and formation of a peptide bond between “N”
and “C” of adjacent amino acids.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 14 ---
different shapes on the basis of number, types and sequence of amino acids. It gives
different levels of structure to proteins.
Q.11: Write a comprehensive note on structural levels of proteins. / Elaborate the
levels of organization of proteins.
Ans. The diversity of proteins ranges from simpler (consisting of linear chains of amino
acids) to complex proteins (structural modifications in linear chains). The following are
different levels at which proteins are built.
1. Primary Structure
• Formation: The primary structure of a protein molecule is formed by the linear
arrangement of amino acids. It represents the number and sequence of amino acid
molecules in a polypeptide chain.
• All protein molecules (whether simple or complex) have specific primary structures.
• The primary structure of insulin reveals that it is composed of two polypeptide chains.
The smaller alpha chain has 21 amino acids while the longer beta chain is made of 30
amino acids.
★ Protein in Humans: These are over 10,000 proteins in human body and each of these
has its specific primary structure i.e., specific number, specific sequence and specific
types of amino acids.
• Bonds: If proteins are made up of single polypeptide chain, bonds are peptide bonds. If
proteins have more than one polypeptide chains, they are attached with disulphide bond
or bridge.
[Image of insulin chains]
Fig: Chains of insulin
Importance of primary structure: The number and sequence of amino acids is highly
specific in the primary structure of a protein. This specificity in primary structure is
determined by the order of nucleotides in DNA. Any change results in abnormal protein that
fails to carry out its normal function.
Substitution of amino acids
The number, sequence and types of amino acids is highly specific in the primary structure of
a protein, for its proper functioning. This specificity in primary structure is determined by
the order of nucleotides in DNA. Any change results in abnormal protein that fails to carry
out its normal function.
For example, sickle cell haemoglobin is formed by a mistake in the arrangement of only
one amino acid in position six in each beta chain. In sickle cell haemoglobin, amino acid
valine is present in the place of glutamic acid. Due to sickle cell haemoglobin, red blood cell

--- Page 15 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

get stickle shapes and abnormal haemoglobin cannot transport sufficient oxygen. This
disease is known as sickle cell anaemia.

[IMAGE]
Fig: Difference in amino acid sequence in normal and sickle cell haemoglobin

2. Secondary Structure
• Formation: The folding or coiling patterns that occur within a polypeptide chain is
called secondary structure.
Types
• Coiling of a polypeptide chain results in alpha helix
• The folding of polypeptide makes a pleated sheet.
• Bonds: Both these structures are maintained by hydrogen bonds between amino and
carboxyl groups of nearby amino acids in the chain.
3. Tertiary Structure
• Formation: When the secondary structure further folds up and gets a complicated
globular shape. It is called the tertiary structure of protein. These are more complex
proteins.
• Bonds: The globular shape is maintained by ionic, hydrogen and disulphide bonds.
These bonds contribute to the overall stability and shape of the protein.
• Most stable tertiary structure: Amino acids in a polypeptide chain interact with water
to give the most stable tertiary structure in the form of a globular shape. These are
hydrophilic and hydrophobic interactions. The hydrophobic (non-polar) amino acids
aggregate in such a way that they disrupt hydrogen bonding of water molecules and so
are buried inside. At the same time the hydrophilic (polar) amino acids turn out, towards
the surface of water.
4. Quaternary Structure
• Formation: Aggregation of two or more than two tertiary polypeptide structures is
called quaternary structure.
• Bonds: When two or more polypeptide chains with tertiary structures are held together
by hydrophobic interactions, hydrogen bonds and ionic bonds, they form most
complex proteins.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 16 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Alpha helix
Pleated sheet
Secondary Structure
(alpha helix)
Tertiary Structure
(folding in secondary structure)
Primary Structure
(chain of amino acids)
Secondary Structure
(pleated sheet)
Quaternary Structure
(aggregation of Tertiary structure)
Fig: Levels of protein structure

Q.12: Explain the classification of protein in tabulated form.
Ans.
Characteristics of Fibrous and Globular Proteins
Characteristics Fibrous Proteins Globular Proteins
Shape In the form of fibrils Spherical or ellipsoidal
Structure Primary or Secondary Tertiary or quaternary
Role Structural Functional
Crystallization Non crystalline and elastic Can be crystallized
Solubility Insoluble Soluble in salt, acid or base
solutions and in aqueous
alcohol
Disorganization Do not disorganize easily Disorganized with changes
in environment
Examples Silk fibre-from the webs of Enzymes – biocatalyst
silk worm and spider Antibodies – active against
Actin in muscle cells invading antigens
Fibrin – in blood clots Hormones – regulate
Keratin – in nails, hairs, body’s activities
beak, skin etc. Haemoglobin – oxygen
Collagen – in matrix of carrying protein
connective tissues

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 17 ---
Q.13: Write a comprehensive answer emphasizing the importance and roles of proteins in life.
Ans. Proteins carry out virtually all activities of living organisms. Some of their remarkable structural and functional roles are given below.
1. Component of plasma membrane
Proteins are an important part of the composition of all plasma membranes.
2. Channel proteins: Channel proteins in the membranes of cells control the movement of materials in and out of cells. For example, proteins make sodium – potassium pump in the cell membrane of neurons. This pump controls the movement of Na+ and K+ ions in and out of nerve cell.
3. Fibrous Proteins: Some fibrous proteins e.g., collagen and keratin make almost whole structures of cartilage and hair, nails respectively.
4. Enzymes: Enzymes are a class of proteins that catalyse the metabolism of cells. They are a much diverse class of proteins. For example, proteases catalyse the breakdown of proteins, polymerases catalyse the synthesis of polymers.
5. Hormones: Some very important hormones of animals are proteins or peptides in nature. For example; insulin (controls blood glucose level), antidiuretic hormone (increases water retention by kidneys), oxytocin (regulates milk production).
6. Globular Proteins: Some globular proteins work to transport different materials throughout the body. For example; haemoglobin and myoglobin transport O2 and some CO2, and cytochromes work in electron transport chain as electron carriers.
7. Albumin is a blood protein that maintains osmotic concentration of blood and keeps its ability to flow.
8. Blood clotting is important to prevent the loss of blood after an injury. Fibrinogen protein is present in blood. When an injury occurs, fibrinogen is activated into fibrin. The fibrin makes fibres and a clot is formed.
9. Contractile proteins: All types of contractions in living matter are due to the actions of proteins. For example, actin and myosin are main proteins of muscles. They are responsible for muscular contractions. Tubulin protein makes spindle fibres.
10. Defence proteins: Antibodies are important proteins. They recognize and combine with foreign substances (antigens) and convert them into harmless products.
11. Ion-binding proteins: Some ion-binding proteins store ions in different parts of body. For example, ferritin is the main intracellular iron storage protein. Similarly, casein is a milk protein that stores potassium and calcium ions.
12. Repressors are the proteins that regulate gene action by preventing the synthesis of RNA. These proteins allow genes to work where and when required.
Lipids
Q.14: What are lipids? Describe the properties and roles of acylglycerols phospholipids, terpenes and waxes.
Ans. Lipids: Lipids are a loosely defined group of non-polar molecules that are insoluble in water but soluble in organic solvents (e.g., ether, alcohol, etc). They are a diverse group of molecules and are classified as acylglycerols, waxes, phospholipids, terpenes, steroids and prostaglandins.

--- Page 18 ---
(A) Acylglycerols (Fats and Oils)
Subunits: Acylglycerols are composed of two subunits; glycerol and fatty acid.
Oil: The acylglycerols which are liquid at room temperature, are called oils.
Fats: The acylglycerols which are solid at room temperature, are called fats. In animals,
most acylglycerols are fats.
In plants, most acylglycerols are oils; for example, peanut oil, corn oil, castor oil etc.
Chemical Composition: Chemically, acylglycerols are the esters of fatty acids and
alcohol. They are synthesized through dehydration synthesis (H is released from alcohol
and OH from an acid) as shown below.
C₂H₅OH + HOOCCH₃ → C₂H₅OCOCH₃ + H₂O
alcohol acetic acid an ester
(ethylacetate)
Example: The most widely found acylglycerols are triacylglycerol (triglycerides), also
called neutral lipids.
Glycerol: It is a 3C alcohol and each of its carbon bears a hydroxyl group. The 3 carbons of
glycerol form the backbone of acylglycerol molecule, to which three fatty acids are attached.
Fatty acids: These are responsible for all the characteristics of acylglycerols. Fatty acids
are long hydrocarbon chains (with carbon in even number 4 – 30), ending in a carboxyl (-
COOH) group. They vary in length and may be as straight chains (in animals) or branched
or ringed (in plants). They are of two types:
• Saturated fatty acids contain no double bond in
their hydrocarbon chain. In saturated fatty acids, all
internal carbon atoms possess hydrogen side groups.
These fatty acids make straight chains, and have a
high melting point.
• Unsaturated fatty acids have double bonds (6
maximum) between one or more pairs of carbon
atoms. The double bonds replace some of the
hydrogen atoms. Therefore, unsaturated fatty acids
contain fewer than the maximum number of
hydrogen atoms.
These fatty acids form bent chains, and have a low
melting point.
★ If a fatty acid has one double bond it is called mono-unsaturated.
★ If there are more than one double bond, it is called poly-unsaturated.
Solubility: Solubility of fatty acids (in organic solvents) and their melting points increase
with increasing number of carbon atoms in their chains.
Efficient energy-storage: Acylglycerols are efficient energy-storage molecules. It is due to
higher number of C-H bonds in them. They are insoluble, because of their non-polar
structure. Therefore, they can be deposited at specific storage locations within organism.
Animal fats contain more energy than do plant oils, because they contain saturated fatty

--- Page 19 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

acids and so contain more C-H bonds. On the other hand, plant oils have unsaturated fatty
acids and contain comparatively lesser number of C-H bonds. When organisms have to store
glucose for long periods, they usually convert it into fats or oils.
[Image of chemical reaction]
Fig: Dehydration synthesis of a triacylglycerol

B. Waxes
Physical Properties: Waxed are derived from acylglycerols. They have high melting
points, because of large number of C atoms and so are solid at room temperature.
Chemical Composition: Chemically, waxes do not have any well-defined structure and
composition. They are mixtures of long chain alkanes (with carbon atoms in odd number;
C25-C35), alcohols (other than glycerol), ketones and long chain fatty acids.
Significances of waxes
• Waxes are chemically inert. Like other lipids, waxes are strongly hydrophobic. So, they
act as protective coverings and water barriers for living organisms.
• Waxes are widespread as protective coatings on fruits and leaves.
• Some animals like insects, birds, sheep etc. also secrete waxes over their skin.
• Waxes are used to waterproof paper and cards. Waxes are also used in wax polishes for
furniture, footwear and vehicles.
• Waxes are also used to make candles.
• Waxes with coloured pigments are used in making crayons and coloured pencils.
★ Wax production: Honeybees produce waxes and use it to make six sided (hexagonal)
chambers of their combs, where honey is stored. In humans, wax is secreted by glands of
the outer ear canal.
[Image of wax products]
Wax on cuticles leaves Wax crayons Wax candles Waxy polish
Fig: Some uses of waxes

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 20 ---
C. Phospholipids
• Chemical Composition: Chemically they are the derivatives of phosphatidic acid.
Phosphatidic acid is composed of one glycerol, two fatty acids and one phosphoric
acid (phosphate).
• Any nitrogenous base e.g., choline, ethanolamine or serine attaches with its
phosphoric acid and makes phospholipid.
• Examples: Common examples are phosphatidyl-choline (lecithin), phosphatidyl
ethanolamine and phosphatidyl serine.
HO-CH2
HO-CH
HO-CH2
Glycerol
HO-C-Long Hydrocarbon chain
O
Fatty acid
O
O-P-O
O
Phosphate
CH3
CH3-N-CH2-CH2-OH
CH3
Nitrogenous base (Choline)
Hydrophilic
head
Hydrophilic
tail
CH3
CH3-N-CH2-CH2-O-P-O-CH2
CH3
O
Choline Phosphate
CH-O-C-(CH2)14-CH3
CH2-O-C-(CH2)7-CH=CH-(CH2)7-CH3
O
Glycerol
Fatty acids
Phosphatidic acid
Phosphatidyl choline
Fig: Phosphatidyl choline-(lecithin ,a phospholipid)
Components of phospholipids: Phospholipids have two parts of their molecules i.e., head
and tail.
(i) Head: Head is polar and contains nitrogenous base and.phosphate group.
(ii) Tail: Tail is non polar and contains the two fatty acids.
Roles of Phospholipids
• Phospholipids play important structural roles in making plasma membranes.
Phosphatidyl-choline forms lipid bilayer in plasma membranes.
D. Terpenes
Composition: It is a very large and diverse group of lipids. All terpenes are made of
isoprene units.
Structure of formula: An isoprene unit is a branched unsaturated hydrocarbon chain with
the formula CH2=C(CH3) - CH=CH2.
Roles: Terpenes form many biologically important pigments, such as chlorophyll in plants
and retinal pigments in eyes.
Example: Vitamin A and rubber are also terpenes.
CH 3
C
CH 2
CH 2
C
H
Isoprene unit
CH 3
CH 3
OH
C
CH 2
CH
CH 2
CH 2
CH 2
CH 2
CH 2
Fig: Structure of terpenes

--- Page 21 ---
Q.15: Describe the characteristics and role of steroids and prostaglandins.
Ans. Steroids: Steroids are lipids whose carbon skeleton is bent to form four fused rings. All steroids have the same ring pattern i.e., three 6-cornored rings and one 5-cornored ring.
• Role: Cholesterol is a common steroid in animal cell membranes. Animal cells also use it for making other steroids e.g., male and female sex hormones.
• Anabolic steroids: Today, anabolic steroids are banned. Anabolic steroids can cause serious physical and mental problems e.g., deep depression, liver damage etc.
Prostaglandins
Prostaglandins are a group of lipids that are modified fatty acids, with non- polar tails attached to a five-carbon ring.
• Role: They occur in many tissues of vertebrates, where they act as local chemical messengers. Some of them stimulate smooth muscles to contract and relax; others constrict or expand the diameter of blood vessels.
• They are also involved in inflammatory response to infection. Aspirin is the inhibitor of prostaglandins.
Q.16: Which important roles are played by lipids in sustaining life?
Ans. Role of lipids in life
Sources of energy: Lipids are important sources of energy (ATP). In fact, lipids are the most energy rich of all nutrients. One gram of lipids provides 9.5 kilocalories of energy. The same amount of protein provides 5.6 kilocalories while that of carbohydrate provides 4.1 kilocalories.
Components of membranes: Lipids are essential components of all cellular and subcellular membranes.
Biological carriers: They serve as biological carriers for the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E and K.
Source of fatty acids: Lipids are a source of fatty acids, which are essential for various metabolisms.
Mechanical cushion: Lipids play a role as a mechanical cushion/support for vital body organs.
Insulation: The lipids (fats) present beneath skin, insulate the body from extreme temperatures.
Steroids perform a wide range of important biological functions. For example, cholesterol is involved in the maintenance of membranes. It also helps in lipid transport. It as a precursor of vitamin D, bile acids, and steroid hormones (androgens, oestrogens), adrenal hormones and corticosteroids.

--- Page 22 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

NUCLEIC ACIDS
Q.17: Write a comprehensive note on chemical composition of nucleic acids.
Ans. Nucleic acid: Nucleic acids are the polymers of nucleotide units. There are two main
types of nucleic acids i.e., deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA).
Occurrence: DNA is found mainly in chromosomes, with small amounts in mitochondria
and chloroplasts. RNA is found in nucleolus, ribosomes and cytosol.
Composition: A nucleotide is made up of a nucleoside and phosphoric acid. A nucleoside
is made of a nitrogen base and a pentose sugar.

Nucleoside
Nucleotide
Nucleic
acid
Fig: Components of nucleic acids
Pentose sugar

a. Pentose sugars: RNA contains ribose (C5H10O5) while DNA contains deoxyribose
(C5H10O4) as their pentoses.
b. Nitrogenous bases: There are two types of nitrogenous
bases in nucleic acids i.e., pyrimidine bases and purine
bases.
• Pyrimidine: Pyrimidine is a single ringed nitrogenous
base. There are three pyrimidine bases in nucleic acids.
Cytosine (C) is present in both DNA and RNA,
thymine (T) is present only in DNA, and uracil (U) is
present only in RNA.
Purine: Purine is a double ring nitrogenous base. Both
DNA and RNA contain two purine bases i.e., adenine (A)
and guanine (G).
One nitrogenous base is attached with carbon 1 of
pentose sugar and makes a nucleoside.
c. Phosphoric acid: A nucleoside develops ester linkage
with a phosphoric acid and becomes nucleotide. In this
ester linkage, phosphoric acid is linked with C-5 of
pentose sugar. The backbone of the structure of nucleic
acids is made of sugars and phosphates.

Bases
Backbone
Fig: Sugar-phosphate
backbone of nucleic acids

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 23 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

NH2 O O
N NH NH
P P P
5 O 5 O 5 O
4 1 4 1 4 1
3 2 3 2 3 2
Cytosine Thymine Uracil
Cytosine nucleotide Thymine nucleotide Uracil nucleotide
NH2 O
N N N NH
P P
5 O 5 O NH2
4 1 4 1
3 2 3 2
Adenine Guanine
Adenine nucleotide Guanine nucleotide
Fig: Nucleotides of RNA and DNA

Q.18: How is phosphodiester bond created? Discuss the biological importance of
important nucleotides.
Ans. Formation of Phosphodiester Bond
In one nucleotide, phosphoric acid has an ester linkage at C-5 of pentose sugar. This
phosphoric acid develops another ester linkage at C-3 of pentose sugar of another
nucleotide. In this way, each phosphoric acid has two ester linkages with two pentose sugars
(one at C- 5 and other at C-3).
Phosphodiester: The two ester linkages developed by phosphoric acid with two pentose
sugars are known as phosphodiester linkage. This linkage joins two nucleotides.
Ribonucleotides: The nucleotides of RNA are known as NH2
ribonucleotides. N
Deoxyribonucleotides: Nucleotides of DNA are known P O
as deoxyribonucleotides. They are named after the type of 5
nitrogen base. 3 2
Biological importance of nucleotides
• Nucleotides also play other critical roles in the life of O
cell. For example; ATP is a triphosphate nucleotide of P O
adenine. In ATP, three phosphate groups are attached 5 NH2
with one ribose sugar. ATP is the “energy currency” 4 1 N
of cell. It provides energy by successively detaching its 3 2
two phosphate groups and changing to ADP and AMP. Fig: A dinucleotide
• Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide (NAD) is a co-
enzyme. It acts as a hydrogen acceptor in oxidation-
reduction reactions in cell.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 24 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q.19: Explain the double helical structure of DNA as proposed by Watson and Crick.
Ans.
• James D. Watson and Francis Crick, in 1953 put forward the model of DNA.
• Watson and Crick's Model of DNA suggests the following points:
• DNA is made of two polynucleotide chains or strands.
• The two strands are coiled around each other and make a double helix.
• The double helix is like a ladder. Its poles are made of sugars and phosphate groups. Its
rungs are made of nitrogenous base pairs.
• Each base pair (rung) is made of one purine (A or G) and one pyrimidine (C or T) base.

[Image of DNA structure]
Fig: (a) Watson and Crick model of DNA. (b) The detailed structure of DNA
• Two strands are held together by weak hydrogen bonds between their bases.
• Adenine in one chain makes hydrogen bonds with thymine in second chain, or vice
versa. Guanine in one chain makes hydrogen bonds with cytosine in second chain, or vice
versa.
• There are two hydrogen bonds between A and T pair and three hydrogen bonds
between G and C pair.
• Two strands are not in the same direction with respect to their phosphodiester linkages,
but are anti-parallel to each other.
Q.20: Briefly describe the importance of DNA.
Ans. Location: DNA is the fundamental part of chromosomes and so is located inside
nucleus in eukaryotes. As there is no distinct nucleus in prokaryotes, their DNA is present in
cytoplasm. In viruses, DNA is located as a core molecule, covered by a protein coat.
Function: DNA is the hereditary material for all organisms (except some viruses). DNA
contains the "program" that ultimately directs all cellular activities. The program in DNA
is in the form of genes.
Gene: A gene is a sequence of nucleotides of DNA, which codes for the formation of a
polypeptide.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 25 ---
When a gene is turned "ON", the sequence of DNA nucleotides is transcribed into RNA
and then translated into specific proteins.
In this way DNA controls the properties and activities of a cell.
★Genetic composition of E.coli: In the chromosome of bacterium E.coli, each strand of
DNA contains about 5 million bases arranged in a particular linear order. It has genes, each
consisting of several hundred bases.
Q.21: Explain the general structure of RNA and differentiate between three types of
RNA.
Ans. Ribonucleic Acid RNA
• It is composed by ribonucleotides.
• RNA is synthesized by joining ribonucleotides in front of deoxyribonucleotides of DNA
by transcription process.
Types: All living cells contain three types of RNA.
1. Messenger RNA (mRNA)
It consists of a single strand of ribonucleotides. Its sequence of nucleotides is complimentary
to the sequence of nucleotides of one of the strands of DNA. mRNA is about 3-4% of the
total amount of RNA in cell. It carries the genetic message of DNA to ribosomes to form
particular protein.
2. Transfer RNA (tRNA)
It is comparatively small. It is a helical structure and its molecule resembles a clover leaf. It
consists of 10-15% of the total amount of RNA in cell. tRNAs transport amino acids to
ribosome and mRNA, in the process of protein synthesis.
3. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
It is synthesized by the DNA of nucleoli. After its synthesis, ribosomal RNA is joined with
ribosomal protein and ribosomes are formed. It comprises about 80% of the total RNA in
cell. rRNA acts as the machinery for synthesis of proteins in ribosomes.

Sugar-Phosphate backbone
Nitrogenous
bases
Fig: A model of RNA structure

Q.22: Briefly descirbe the central dogma of protein synthesis.
Ans. Central Dogma
All organisms use the same basic mechanism of reading and expressing genes, which is
often referred to as central dogma.
Transcription: The first step of central dogma is the transfer of information from DNA to
RNA, which occurs when an RNA copy of the gene is produced. The process is called
transcription. In prokaryotes it occurs in the cytoplasm while in eukaryotes transcription
occurs in the nucleus. Transcription requires a promotor sequence to be started.

--- Page 26 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Translation: The second step of the central dogma is the
transfer of information from RNA to proteins, which
occurs when the information contained in the RNA is
used to direct the synthesis of proteins. This process is
called translation. In prokaryotes translation directly starts
in the cytoplasm as they lack nucleus, while in eukaryotes
mRNA has to be transported to the cytoplasm for
decoding and protein synthesis. Translation starts from a
start codon which codes for Methionine.
In this way DNA controls the properties and activities of
a cell.

                                                                                                   Replication
                                                                                                   (DNA-DNA)
                                                                                                   DNA polymerase
                                                                                                   DNA
                                                                                                   Transcription
                                                                                                   (DNA-RNA)
                                                                                                   RNA
                                                                                                   Translation
                                                                                                   (RNA-Protein)
                                                                                                   ●●●●●●●Protein
                                                                                                   Fig: Flow sheet of central dogma

CONJUGATED MOLECULES
Q.23: Define conjugated molecules and describe the roles of common conjugated
molecules.
Ans. Conjugated molecules are formed by the combination of two or more molecules
belonging to different categories.
Examples: Some important conjugated molecules are as follows.
(i) Glycoproteins: They are formed by covalent linkage between a protein and a
carbohydrate polymer. They occur widely in nature as integral structural component of
membranes; in blood serum; as cellular secretions; and in cartilage, eyes, skin etc.
(ii) Glycolipids: They are formed by a covalent linkage between a lipid and a
carbohydrate. They are an integral structural component of membranes.
(iii) Lipoproteins: They are a class of biomolecules which are formed by hydrophobic
interactions (not covalent or ionic bonds) between lipids and proteins. Lipoproteins are
the basic structural framework of all types of plasma membranes. Lipids are transported in
blood as very low-density lipoproteins.
(iv) Nucleoproteins: They are formed by ionic bonds between chromosomal DNA and
proteins. For example, histone proteins are bound to DNA to form nucleosomes. They
stabilize chromosomal structure in eukaryotes and also play an important role in the
regulation of gene expression.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch4 Long Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [20/36]: 11th Bio New Ch4 MCQ's.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
Unit 4: Biomolecules

Multiple Choice Questions

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)

1. Which characteristics of water
molecules is responsible for most of
the unique properties of water?
(a) Small in size
(b) Held together by covalent bonds
(c) Can easily separate from one another
(d) Stick together

2. To which group of lipids, the human
sex hormones belong?
(a) Steroid
(b) Waxes
(c) Prostaglandins
(d) Phospholipids

3. Which of the following is NOT a protein?
(a) Haemoglobin
(b) Cholesterol
(c) Pepsin
(d) Antibody

4. Which one is the largest carbohydrate?
(a) Cellulose
(b) Ribose
(c) Glyceraldehyde
(d) Glucose

5. What compound would be
manufactured difficulty when soil has
a shortage of phosphorous?
(a) DNA
(b) Fatty acids
(c) Proteins
(d) Cellulose

--- Page 2 ---
6. A compound whose chemical
composition is most closely related to
maltose is:
(a) Starch (b) Protein
(c) ATP (d) RNA
7. Which group is found in all fatty
acids?
(a) PO4 (b) SO4
(c) C-N (d) COOH

8. Haemoglobin has:
(a) Primary structure
(b) Secondary structure
(c) Tertiary structure
(d) Quaternary structure
9. Which process produces peptide
bonds?
(a) Digestion
(b) Dehydration synthesis
(c) Hydrolysis
(d) Enzyme deactivation

SLO BASED MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS

Biological Molecules
10. Basic knowledge of biochemistry helps
to understand anatomy and .............
(a) Morphology (b) Parasitology
(c) Physiology (d) Pathology
11. The type of metabolic reactions in
which simpler substances are
combined to form complex substance
are called:
(a) Anabolic reactions
(b) Catabolic reactions
(c) Redox reactions
(d) Hydrolytic reactions
12. The percentage of water which makes
the living mass of living organism is at
least:
(a) 60% (b) 70%
(c) 80% (d) 90%
13. Proteins, nucleic acids and lipids
make .......... of the dry mass of living
organisms:
(a) 93% (b) 7%
(c) 78% (d) 50%
14. Molecule consisting of many identical
molecular units is called:
(a) Monomer (b) Isomer
(c) Enantiomer (d) Polymer

Types of bonds in biology
15. Which bond have stored energy and
known as potential source of energy?
(a) C-N bond (b) C-O bond
(c) C-H bond (d) C-C bond
16. Atom A shares its electron with Atom
B which type of chemical bond is most
likely to be formed between them?
(a) Covalent
(b) Ionic
(c) Hydrogen
(d) Hydrophobic interaction
17. Sodium atom loses its electron and
becomes cation, while chlorine accepts
that electron and becomes anion, an
electrostatic attraction is created
between them, which is also called as:
(a) Covalent bond
(b) Ionic bond
(c) Dipole-dipole interaction
(d) Hydrogen bond
18. The bond which helps in maintaining
the structure of large molecules like
proteins, nucleic acids, as well as DNA
replication is:
(a) Hydrophobic interaction
(b) Hydrophilic interaction
(c) Ionic bond
(d) Hydrogen bond

--- Page 3 ---
19. Non-polar molecules tend to cluster
together in aqueous environments to
minimize contact with water
molecules. This phenomenon is
termed as:
(a) Hydrophobic interaction
(b) Hydrogen bonding
(c) Hydrophilic interaction
(d) Condensation
20. Which type off reaction is being
shown below:
Glucose Glucose Maltose
OH OH OH OH
Water
(a) Dehydration synthesis
(b) Condensation
(c) Hydrolysis
(d) Both (a) and (b)
21. Breakdown of maltose into two
glucose monomers by the addition of
water molecules is an example of:
(a) Hydrolysis
(b) Condensation
(c) Dehydration synthesis
(d) Redox reaction
Importance of Water
22. The concentration of water in
different organisms, varies from:
(a) 40 – 80% (b) 65 to 89%
(c) 80 – 90% (d) 50 – 60%
23. Which one of the following is not a
hydrophilic molecule?
(a) Salts (b) Sugars
(c) Amino acids (d) Lipids
★24. If there were no hydrogen bonding
in water, then the water would boil at
...... and freeze at ......:
(a) 60°C, 90°C (b) -80°C, -100°C
(c) 80°C, 100°C (d) -100°C, 0°C

25. When oil is dropped into water, oil is
excluded from water forming strong
associations among themselves, this
phenomenon is called:
(a) Hydrophobic exclusion
(b) Hydrophobic interaction
(c) Hydrogen bonding
(d) Hydrophilic interaction
26. Water's high heat capacity benefits
living tissues by:
(a) Providing protection against sudden
thermal changes
(b) Preventing ionization
(c) Making emollient sensation
(d) Providing cooling effect
27. The specific heat of vaporization of
water is:
(a) 570 Kcal/kg
(b) 374 cal/moles
(c) 574 kcal/kg
(d) 717.6 kcal/gram
★28. Evaporation of 2ml of water out of 1
litre lowers the temperature of
remaining 998ml water by:
(a) 1°C (b) 2°C
(c) 3°C (d) 4°C
29. Surface tension allows water striders
to walk on water due to:
(a) High specific heat capacity
(b) Polarity of water molecules
(c) Cohesive forces between water
molecules
(d) All of the above
30. At room temperature (25°C), in a litre
of water, out of 550 million water
molecules, only ...... gets ionized:
(a) 100 molecules
(b) 10,000 molecules
(c) 550 million molecules
(d) only 1 molecule
31. Water exhibits its maximum density
at:
(a) 100°C (b) 0°C
(c) 4°C (d) -100°C

--- Page 4 ---
32. Ice floating protects aquatic
ecosystems by:
(a) Forming an insulating layer that traps
heat
(b) Making compartments in sea
(c) Reflecting sunlight
(d) Evaporation prevention

Carbohydrates
33. During photosynthesis, when
reduction of CO2 occurs, the resulting
sugar molecule contains carbon,
hydrogen and oxygen in molar ratio:
(a) 1:4:1 (b) 1:2:1
(c) 3:6:8 (d) 2:1:2
34. Which one of the following is NOT a
hexose?
(a) Glucose (b) Fructose
(c) Galactose (d) Erythrose
35. The primary energy-storage molecule
is glucose, and the number of CH-
bonds in it are:
(a) 5 (b) 6
(c) 7 (d) 3
36. Glucose and galactose have a
difference in the orientation of one
OH (hydroxyl) group at:
(a) C3 (b) C4
(c) C5 (d) C6
37. Which of the following hexoses show
stereoisomerism?
(a) Glucose and galactose
(b) Fructose and galactose
(c) Glucose and fructose
(d) All of the above
38. The sugar which acts as a precursor in
photosynthesis is:
(a) Glucose (b) Ribose
(c) Ribulose (d) Erythrose
39. In case of glucose, oxygen-bridge
develops between:
(a) C1 and C2 (b) C2 and C5
(c) C2 and C4 (d) C1 and C5

40. Glucose molecule having OH group on
upper/above side is termed as:
(a) Alpha D-glucose
(b) Beta D-glucose
(c) Charli D-glucose
(d) Gamma D-glucose
41. The Fischer projection was devised by
German chemist Emil Fischer in:
(a) 1994 (b) 1831
(c) 1891 (d) 1952
42. Which is NOT related to maltose?
(a) 1,4 - glycosidic linkage
(b) Formed by 2 glucose monomers
(c) Formed as an intermediate product
during digestion of starch
(d) Beta-D-glucose
43. The disaccharide found only in
mammalian milk, which is main
source of energy for infant of
mammals is:
(a) Maltose (b) Cane sugar
(c) Agar (d) Lactose
44. Which of the following is the most
familiar disaccharide?
(a) Maltose (b) Sucrose
(c) Lactose (d) Both (a) and (c)
45. Lactose intolerance arises from
deficiency of an enzyme that breaks:
(a) $\alpha$ (1-2) bonds in sucrose
(b) $\alpha$ (1-4) bonds in starch
(c) $\beta$ (1-4) bonds in lactose
(d) $\alpha$ (1-6) bonds in amylopectin
46. Compared to amylose, amylopectin is
digested at faster rate because:
(a) it lacks hydrogen bonds
(b) it contains nitrogen containing group
(c) branch structure provides more attack
points
(d) both (a) and (b)
47. High-fructose corn syrup has replaced
...... as a sweetener:
(a) Glucose (b) Sucrose
(c) Maltose (d) Lactose

--- Page 5 ---
48. Glucose is ....... as sweet as sucrose:
(a) Half (b) 2 times
(c) 4 times (d) 10 times
49. Chitin differs from cellulose in having:
(a) $\alpha$ (1-4) linkages
(b) Nitrogen – containing groups
(c) Branched glucose chain
(d) Ether linkage
50. Cellulose is not digested by humans because:
(a) It lacks glycosidic bonds
(b) It contains nitrogen containing group
(c) It is very hard to eat
(d) Human amylase cannot hydrolyze $\beta$ (1-4) linkages
51. Starch coils into helices, while cellulose forms straight chains, due to differences in:
(a) Glycosidic bond orientation ($\alpha$ vs $\beta$)
(b) Hydrogen bond number
(c) Isomerization
(d) Presence of n-containing groups
52. Modified form of cellulose is called:
(a) Agar (b) Pectin
(c) Dextrin (d) Chitin
53. Which one of the following polysaccharide is found in the cell walls of red algae?
(a) Murein (b) Chitin
(c) Agar (d) Cellulose
54. The straight chains of cellulose are linked together by ...... to form cellulose microfibrils:
(a) Covalent bond
(b) Hydrogen bond
(c) Ionic bond
(d) Peptide bond
Proteins
55. The term “Protein” was coined by:
(a) J. Berzelius (b) F. Sanger
(c) Meselson (d) Watson and crick

56. The most abundant organic biomolecules in cells are:
(a) Nucleic acids (b) Carbohydrates
(c) Lipids (d) Proteins
57. The total number of different types of amino acids that have been reported to occur in living organisms is:
(a) 25 (b) 20
(c) 170 (d) 300
58. Which group of amino acid is responsible for its identity and unique chemical properties:
(a) NH$_2$ group (b) COOH group
(c) R-group (d) All of above
59. Which one of the following amino acid is not synthesized by our bodies?
(a) Alanine (b) Proline
(c) Glutamine (d) Histidine
★60. Disaccharides and dipeptides are formed as a result of:
(a) Dehydration synthesis (b) Hydrolysis
(c) Oxidation reduction (d) Catabolism
61. Number of peptide bonds in tetrapetide are/is:
(a) 1 (b) 2
(c) 3 (d) 4
62. If hemoglobin’s quaternary structure was disrupted what would be the immediate consequence?
(a) Oxygen transportation efficiency would decrease
(b) Hemoglobin would more efficiently transport gases
(c) Size of RBCs would increase
(d) Both (b) and (c)
63. In the primary structure of insulin alpha chain has 21 amino acids while beta chain has 30 amino acids, both these chains are joined by:
(a) Hydrogen bond
(b) Disulphide bond
(c) Ionic bond
(d) Covalent bond

--- Page 6 ---
64. Sickle cell hemoglobin valine takes the
place of:
(a) Glutamic acid (b) Glutamine
(c) Aspartic acid (d) Phenylalanine
65. The proteins get coiled or folded
within polypeptide chain at:
(a) Primary level (b) Secondary level
(c) Tertiary level (d) Quaternary level
66. The bond which maintains secondary
structure of a protein is:
(a) Hydrophobic interaction
(b) Ionic bond
(c) Hydrophilic interaction
(d) Hydrogen bond
67. The globular structure of a protein is
maintained by ……… bonds:
(a) Ionic, hydrogen, disulphide
(b) Hydrogen, covalent, peptide
(c) Hydrophobic interactions, hydrogen
bond, hydrophilic interactions
(d) Only hydrogen bond
68. Aggregation of tertiary structures
makes ……… structure of protein:
(a) Primary (b) Secondary
(c) Tertiary (d) Quaternary
69. Which one of the following proteins
can be crystallized?
(a) Fibrin (b) Keratin
(c) Collagen (d) Antibody
70. A researcher discovers a protein that
changes shape when pH drops below
6.5. This protein is most likely:
(a) Fibrous protein
(b) Globular protein
(c) Collagen
(d) Actin and myosin
71. A patient with a clotting disorder
likely has a deficiency in:
(a) Fibrinogen (b) Hemoglobin
(c) Insulin (d) Albumin
72. The class of proteins that catalyse the
metabolism of cells is:
(a) Channel proteins (b) Enzymes
(c) Cytochromes (d) Repressors

73. A geneticist working in his lab wants
to selectively allow some genes to
work, he uses ……… proteins to
regulate particular gene action:
(a) Ferritin (b) Na-K pump
(c) Repressors (d) Activators
74. Blood ferritin levels are measured in
patients as a diagnostic tool of most
likely:
(a) Anemia (b) Thalassemia
(c) Arthritis (d) Polycythemia
75. Casein is an example of protein that:
(a) Transports electrons
(b) Stores Ca++ and K+
(c) Provides energy
(d) Helps in transport of O2
76. Actin and myosin are critical for:
(a) Muscle contraction
(b) Oxygen transport
(c) Immune response
(d) DNA replication
77. Fibrous proteins are characterized by:
(a) Spherical shape and solubility in water
(b) Tertiary structure and enzymatic
actions
(c) Globular form and hormone production
(d) Fibrillar shape and structural roles
78. What is the primary role of
antibodies?
(a) Transport of CO2
(b) Catalyze metabolic reactions
(c) Store iron
(d) Neutralize antigen
Lipids
79. Lipids are insoluble in water due to
their:
(a) Non-polar nature
(b) High-energy
(c) Ionic bonds
(d) Presence of polysaccharides
80. A student of science working in lab
mixes ethanol in an acetic acid, most-
like the compound formed will be:
(a) Polypeptide (b) Diethyl ether
(c) Ester (d) Terpene

--- Page 7 ---
81. Triacylglycerol’s are composed of:
(a) Glycerol + 3 fatty acids
(b) Glucose + 2 fatty acids
(c) Wax + alcohol
(d) 3 glycerols + 1 fatty acids
82. When organisms have to store glucose
for longer periods, they usually
convert it into:
(a) Dipeptides (b) Fats and oils
(c) Disaccharides (d) Polysaccharides
83. The honey bees use to make hexagonal
chambers of their combs, by
producing:
(a) Acylglycerol (b) Waxes
(c) Phospholipids (d) Terpenoids
84. Which one of the following is not a
part of waxes?
(a) Long chain alkanes
(b) Glycerol
(c) Ketones
(d) Long chain fatty acids
85. The “fluid mosaic model” of cell
membranes is primarily composed of:
(a) Phospholipids (b) Sphingolipids
(c) Glycolipids (d) Both (a) and (c)
86. The tail of phospholipids faces
inwards in a cell membrane because it
is:
(a) Hydrophobic
(b) Hydrophilic
(c) Contains glycerol
(d) Have positive charge
87. Formula of isoprene unit is:
(a) $CH_2 - C(CH_2) - CH = CH_2$
(b) $CH \equiv C(NH_2) - CH_2 - CH_2$
(c) $CH_2 = C(CH_3) - CH = CH_2$
(d) $CH_3 - CH_2 - CH_2 - COOH$
88. The type of lipid found in our retinal
pigments in eyes is:
(a) Phospholipid (b) Terpenoid
(c) Waxes (d) All of above

89. Testosterone is made up of:
(a) 3 – six cornered rings + 1-five
cornered ring
(b) 1 – six cornered ring + 3 – five
cornered ring
(c) Only 3 – six cornered rings
(d) 3 – six cornered rings + 1 four
cornered square
90. Anabolic steroids were originally
developed for the treatment of:
(a) Diabetes mellitus
(b) Infectious diseases
(c) General anemia
(d) Migraine
91. The common steroid, that is a part of
animal cell membranes is:
(a) Testosterone (b) Cholesterol
(c) Prostaglandin (d) Androgens
92. Identify a compound which is lipid
but have modified fats, with non-polar
tails attached to a 5 – carbon ring:
(a) Cholesterol (b) Phospholipid
(c) Acylglycerol (d) Prostaglandin
93. Which statement about prostaglandins
is FALSE?
(a) They control blood vessels diameter
(b) Involved in inflammatory response
(c) Derivate of fatty acids
(d) Stored in large quantities
94. The reason behind Aspirin’s ability to
reduce inflammation, pain and fever is
that it is a:
(a) Prostaglandin inhibitor
(b) Prostaglandin activator
(c) Prostaglandin co-factor
(d) Both (b) and (c)
95. Which one of the following is NOT the
function of cholesterol?
(a) Lipid transport
(b) Precursor of corticosteroids
(c) Precursor of vit-A
(d) Precursor of bile acids

--- Page 8 ---
96. Lipids transport which of the
following vitamins?
(a) Vitamin B12 (b) Vitamin C
(c) Vitamin A (d) Vitamin B6

Nucleic Acids

97. Which pentose sugar is present in
RNA but not in DNA?
(a) Ribose (b) Deoxyribose
(c) Ribulose (d) Glucose
98. Thymine is exclusively found in:
(a) RNA
(b) DNA
(c) DNA and RNA both
(d) AMP
99. A nucleoside consists of:
(a) Nitrogenous base + phosphate
(b) Nitrogenous base + pentose sugar
(c) Pentose sugar + phosphate
(d) Nitrogenous base + pentose sugar +
phosphate
100. The back bone of nucleic acids is
formed by:
(a) Nitrogenous base
(b) Sugar + phosphates
(c) Fatty acids
(d) Proteins
101. Phosphodiester bonds in DNA are
formed between:
(a) C5 of one nucleotide and C3 of
another
(b) Nitrogenous bases
(c) Cl- of sugar and phosphate
(d) Purines and pyrimidines
102. Which of the following is a purine
base?
(a) Uracil (b) Cytosine
(c) Thymine (d) Adenine
103. ATP is structurally a:
(a) Disaccharide (b) Nucleotide
(c) Dipeptide (d) Steroid

104. In a polynucleotide chain, the free
ends are:
(a) 5' PO4- + 5' OH
(b) 5' PO4- + 3' OH
(c) 3' PO4- + 5' OH
(d) Both (a) and (b)
105. According to Watson and Crick
model, "the poles" of DNA double
helix are composed of:
(a) Nitrogenous bases
(b) Hydrogen bonds
(c) Sugar + PO4 groups
(d) Ribonucleotides
106. Number of hydrogen bonds between
G and C in a DNA helix are:
(a) 2 (b) 3 (c) 4 (d) 5
107. According to Chargaff's rule, DNA
has:
(a) A + T = G + C
(b) A = G and T = C
(c) A = T and C = G
(d) A < T and C< G
108. The amount of DNA in mitochondria
and chloroplast is:
(a) 1% (b) 2%
(c) 23% (d) 6.1%
109. In the chromosomes of E. coli, each
strand of DNA contains ......... bases
arranged in ......... order.
(a) 5 million, circular
(b) 3 million, linear
(c) 8 million, circular
(d) 5 million, linear
110. Which type of RNA carries the
genetic message from DNA to
ribosomes?
(a) tRNA (b) rRNA
(c) mRNA (d) dRNA
111. Clover leaf structure is the
characteristics of:
(a) mRNA (b) tRNA
(c) rRNA (d) DNA

--- Page 9 ---
112. Ribosomal RNA comprises
approximately what percentage of
total cellular RNA?
(a) 3-4% (b) 10-15%
(c) 80% (d) 50%
113. During translation; tRNA molecules
are responsible for:
(a) Transcribing DNA into RNA
(b) Transporting amino acids to the
ribosomes
(c) Forming the structure of ribosomes
(d) Degradation of mRNA
114. Which RNA is synthesized in
nucleolus?
(a) mRNA (b) tRNA
(c) rRNA (d) All of above
Central Dogma
115. The central dogma of molecular
biology describes the flow of genetic
information are:
(a) DNA → Protein → RNA
(b) DNA → RNA → Protein
(c) RNA → DNA → Protein
(d) Protein → RNA → DNA
116. Translation converts the information
in:
(a) DNA to RNA
(b) RNA to protein
(c) Protein to DNA
(d) RNA to DNA
117. If a gene on a DNA strand has the
sequence 5' - ATGC - 3', the
transcribed mRNA sequence will be:
(a) 5' - TACG - 3'
(b) 5' - UACG - 3'
(c) 5' - ATGC - 3'
(d) 5' - AUCG - 3'
118. The program in DNA that directs
cellular activities is stored in:
(a) Phosphodiester bond
(b) Hydrogen bond
(c) Ribosomal proteins
(d) Genes

119. Who in 1950, concluded that DNA is
a fibrous substance in the form of
helix?
(a) Erwin Chargaff
(b) Watson and Crick
(c) Rosalind
(d) Linus Pauling
Conjugated Molecules
120. Glycoproteins are formed by the
linkage of:
(a) Protein and lipid
(b) Protein and carbohydrate
(c) Two nucleic acids
(d) RNA and histone
121. The conjugated molecules that are
integral structural components of
membranes of the cells are:
(a) Glycolipids (b) Glycoproteins
(c) Nucleoproteins(d) Both (a) and (b)
122. Which of the following are the basic
structural framework of all types of
plasma membranes?
(a) Lipoproteins (b) Glycoproteins
(c) Glycolipids (d) Nucleo histones
123. Which class of biomolecules is formed
by hydrophobic interactions:
(a) Glycoproteins (b) Lipoproteins
(c) Globular proteins (d) Glycolipids
124. The bond present between
chromosomal DNA and proteins is:
(a) Hydrogen bond (b) Ionic bond
(c) Covalent bond (d) Metallic bond
125. The type of conjugated molecules
involved in the regulation of gene
expression are:
(a) Nucleoproteins (b) Glycoprotein
(c) Nucleosomes (d) Both (a) and (c)

--- Page 10 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

ANSWER KEY
1. d 2. a 3. b 4. a 5. a 6. a 7. d 8. d
9. b 10. c 11. a 12. c 13. c 14. d 15 c 16. a
17. b 18. d 19. a 20. a 21. a 22. b 23. d 24. b
25. a 26. a 27. c 28. a 29. c 30. d 31. c 32. a
33. b 34. d 35. c 36. b 37. a 38. c 39. d 40. b
41. c 42. d 43. d 44. b 45. c 46. c 47. b 48. a
49. b 50. d 51. a 52. d 53. c 54. b 55. a 56. d
57. c 58. c 59. d 60. a 61. c 62. a 63. b 64. a
65. b 66. d 67. a 68. d 69. d 70. b 71. a 72. b
73. c 74. a 75. b 76. a 77. d 78. d 79. a 80. c
81. a 82. b 83. b 84. b 85. d 86. a 87. c 88. b
89. a 90. c 91. b 92. d 93. d 94. a 95. c 96. c
97. a 98. b 99. b 100. b 101. a 102. d 103. b 104. b
105. c 106. b 107. c 108. b 109. d 110. c 111. b 112. c
113. b 114. c 115. b 116. b 117. c 118. d 119. d 120. a
121. d 122. a 123. b 124. b 125. d

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch4 MCQ's.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [21/36]: 11th Bio New Ch4 Short Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 4: Biomolecules

Short Questions

SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS EXERCISE

Q1. Draw a sketch of hydrolysis
reactions.
Maltose Glucose Glucose
OH OH OH OH OH
Water

Q2. Draw the ring structures of
glucose and fructose.
CH2OH CH2OH
6 6 O OH
5 5
H H H 2
4 C C 1 4 C C
OH H HO CH2OH
HO 3 C C 2 OH 3 C C
H OH OH H
Glucose Fructose

Q3. Define isomers and stereoisomers.

Ans. Isomers: The molecules which have
the same number of atoms (same molecular
formula) but differ in how the atoms are
arranged (different structural formula) are
called isomers of each other. For example,
glucose is not the only monosaccharide with
the formula C6H12O6. Fructose and galactose
also have the same molecular formula but
their structural formulas are different.
Stereoisomers: Stereoisomers are
compounds with the same molecule formula
but differ in the arrangement of atoms in
three-dimensional space e.g., glucose and
galactoses are stereoisomers at C-4.

Q4. Draw the sketch of amino acid.
R
H2N C COOH
H

Q5. Outline the synthesis of peptide
linkages.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
Ans. A covalent bond that links two
amino acids is known as a peptide bond.
Each amino acid has an amino group at one
end and a carboxyl group at the other end.
When two amino acids are brought closer,
dehydration synthesis occurs between the
amino group of one and the carboxyl group
of second amino acid. It results in the
release of a molecule of water and formation
of a peptide bond between “N” and “C” of
adjacent amino acids.
Q6. Draw the sketch of acylglycerol,
phospholipid and terpene.
[IMAGE]
Q7. Differentiate between nucleoside
and nucleotide.
Ans. A nucleotide is made up of a
nucleoside and phosphoric acid. A
nucleoside is made of a nitrogen base and a
pentose sugar
Q8. Illustrate the formation of
phosphodiester bond.
Ans. In one nucleotide, phosphoric acid
has an ester linkage at C-5of pentose sugar.
This phosphoric acid develops another ester
linkage at C-3 of pentose sugar of another
nucleotide. In this way, each phosphoric
acid has two ester linkages with two pentose
sugars (one at C-5 and other at C-3). The
two ester linkages developed by phosphoric
acid with two pentose sugars are known as
phosphodiester linkage. This linkage joins
two nucleotides.
Q9. State the central dogma of gene
expression.
Ans. All organisms use the same basic
mechanism of reading and expressing genes,
which is often referred to as central dogma.
• The first step of central dogma is the
transfer of information from DNA to
RNA, which occurs when an RNA copy
of the gene is produced. The process is
called transcription.
• The second step of the central dogma is
the transfer of information from RNA to
proteins, which occurs when the
information contained in the RNA is used
to direct the synthesis of proteins. This
process is called translation. In this way
DNA controls the properties and activities
of a cell.

--- Page 3 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

SLO BASED SHORT QUESTION ANSWERS
Q10. Define biochemistry. Why the
basic knowledge of it, is important to
understand life?
Ans. Biochemistry is the study of chemical
components and chemical process, occurring
in living organisms. As all structures of living
organisms have biochemical organization
and all functions occurring in them are due to
biochemical processes, taking place in this
organization. Therefore, the basic knowledge
of biochemistry is helpful to understand
anatomy and physiology of living organisms.
Example: For example, photosynthesis,
respiration, digestion, contraction etc can be
described in biochemical terms.

Q11. Define metabolism write its types.

Ans. All the chemical reactions taking
place within a cell are collectively called
metabolism. The processes in metabolism
may be either anabolism or catabolism.
• In anabolism, simpler substances are
combined to form complex substances.
• In catabolism complex molecules are
broken down into simpler ones.
Biological Molecules
Q12. Compare the percentage composition
of major organic molecules that make 93%
of dry mass of living organisms.
Percentage of major organic molecules
In the dry mass of living organisms
Group Name % Dry mass
Proteins 50
Nucleic Acids 18
Carbohydrates 15
Lipids 10

Q13. Define the term “polymer”. How
does the structure of polymer is formed in
living cells?
Ans. A polymer is a molecule consisting
of many identical molecular units, called
monomers. Many macromolecules are in the
form of polymers. Most of the organic
molecules are large in size and biologists
call them macromolecules. Important
macromolecules like carbohydrates,
proteins, and nucleic acids are the polymers
of simple monomers i.e., sugars, amino
acids and nucleotides respectively.
Types of Bond in Biology
Q14. Describe the significance of
carbons tetravalency in forming organic
molecules and bonds.
Ans. Carbon is the basic element of
organic molecules. It is tetravalent and can
react with many other known elements like
H, O, N, P and S.
• Carbon and hydrogen bond (C-H bond) is
the potential source of chemical energy
for cellular activities.
• Carbon-oxygen association in glycosidic
linkages provides stability to the complex
carbohydrate molecules.
• C-N bond: Carbon combines with
nitrogen in amino acid linkages to form
peptide bonds and forms proteins which
are very important due to their diversity in
structure and functions.
Q15. Compare and contrast covalent
and ionic bond in terms.
• How they are formed
• Their relative strengths
• Their roles in biological molecules
Covalent Bonds Ionic Bonds
• Covalent bonds • Ionic bonds are
form when two formed when one
atoms share atom donates an
electrons. electron (becomes a
• These are less positive ion, or
strong than ionic cation) and another
bond. atom accepts the

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 4 ---
• These bonds are often found in organic molecules like proteins and nucleic acids, providing stability to the molecules.
electron (becomes a negative ion, or anion). The electrostatic attraction between these oppositely charged ions forms the ionic bond.
• Ionic bonds are relatively strong in the solid state.
• They are formed mostly in inorganic molecules like sodium chloride.
environments to minimize contact with water molecules.
• This phenomenon is crucial for the folding of proteins and the formation of lipid bilayers in cell membranes.
Hydrophilic interactions occur between polar molecules and water molecules. These interactions are essential for the dissolution of polar and ionic compounds in water.
• These interactions help in various biological processes such as nutrient transport and chemical reactions within cells.

Condensation and Hydrolysis
Q18. Discuss the process of dehydration synthesis using the example of maltose formation.
Ans. During condensation, an -OH group is removed from one monomer and a-H atom is removed from another monomer It is also known as dehydration synthesis because the removal of OH and H groups means the removal of a water molecule.
The formation of maltose by two glucose monomers is an example of a condensation reaction.

Q16. Why are hydrogen bonds considered to be weak individually but crucial for maintaining the structures of cells?
Ans. Hydrogen bonds are weak attractions that occur between a hydrogen atom and an electronegative atom (such as oxygen or nitrogen).
• These bonds are important in maintaining the structure of large molecules like proteins and nucleic acids, as well as in various biological processes like DNA replication.

Proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, and lipids are assembled from different kinds of monomers. All these biomolecules join their monomers by condensation or dehydration process.

Importance of Water
Q19. Describe how hydrogen bonding between water molecules enables the dissolution of other polar molecules?
/ Describe the solvent properties of water.
/ What will happen if there is no hydrogen bonding in water?
Ans. Solvent Properties
1. The ability of water to dissolve a wide variety of substances is due to its two properties, the polarity of water molecules

Hydrogen bonds between water molecules
Q17. Describe hydrophobic interactions.
How do these interactions differ from hydrophilic interactions?
Ans. Hydrophobic interactions occur between nonpolar molecules and polar molecules (like water). Nonpolar molecules tend to cluster together in aqueous

--- Page 5 ---
and the ability of water molecules to form
hydrogen bonds.
2. The water molecule has distinct ends,
each with a partial charge. Hydrogen atom
is partially positive and oxygen atom is
partially negative. Such molecules are
called polar molecules.
3. Partial negative charge at one end of a
water molecule is attracted to partial
positive of another water molecule. This
weak attraction is called a hydrogen bond.
Water forms a network of such bonds.
Many of the properties of water are due to
hydrogen bonds in water.
4. If water lacked H-bonds, it would have
existed as a gas, and the properties like
high boiling point, surface tension, and
other properties would disappear and it
will be difficult for life to exist.
Q20. How does polar nature of water
molecules help in dissolution of NaCl and
glucose? Water provides a medium for
metabolism justify?
Ans. Due to the polar nature of water
molecules, they gather around any other
molecule that has an electrical charge, whether
in the form of full charge (ions) or partial
charge (polar molecules).
• For example, when sodium chloride (a salt)
is placed in water, it breaks into positive
(Na+) and negative (Cl-) ions. These ions are
surrounded by opposite polar ends of water
molecules.
Water as solvent of inorganic molecules (NaCl)
• Similarly, when a glucose is placed in
water, the molecules of water form
hydrogen bonds with polar hydroxyl
groups of glucose molecules. In this way,
glucose dissolves in water (Figure 4.8). It
means that charged or polar molecules are
soluble in water. In the state of solution,
ions and molecules can react with each
other easily. So, water provides a medium
for chemical reactions i.e., metabolism of
cells.
Water as a solvent of organic molecules
(glucose)
★Q21. Differentiate between hydrophilic
and hydrophobic molecules.
Ans. Hydrophilic: Polar molecules such
as salts, sugars, and amino acids dissolve
readily in water and are called hydrophilic
(water-loving).
Hydrophobic: Uncharged or non- polar
molecules such as lipids do not dissolve in
water and are called hydrophobic (water-
hating).
Q22. Why non-polar or uncharged
molecules are insoluble in water?
Describe hydrophobic exclusion? / Why
lipids are insoluble in water?
Ans. Non-polar or uncharged molecules
are insoluble in water because water
molecules do not make hydrogen bonds
with them. When they are placed in water,
water molecules move them out. The
insoluble molecules make hydrophobic
associations with one another.
For example, lipid molecules are insoluble
in water. When they are excluded from
water, they make strong associations among

--- Page 6 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

themselves. Therefore, lipids help to
maintain membranes of cells.
Q23. Define heat capacity. How does
water works as temperature stabilizer?

Ans. Definition: Specific heat capacity is
defined as the number of calories (amount of
heat) required to raise the temperature of 1
gram of a substance from 15°C to 16°C
(i.e.,1°C).
Heat capacity of water: Water has a high
specific heat capacity i.e., 4.184 Joules. It
means that water has great ability to absorb
and releasing heat with minimum change in
its own temperature.
Water as temperature stabilizer: Most of
the heat energy absorbed by water is used to
break hydrogen bonds between its
molecules. Due to this breakage of
hydrogen bonds, individual water
molecules start moving more freely and
temperature of water rises.
• Due to high specific heat capacity, water
heats up more slowly. Similarly, when it
is given a cooler environment, it holds its
temperature longer Water thus works as
temperature stabilizer not only for
organisms' internal environment but also
for their external environment.
Q24. Define heat of vaporization. What
is the benefit of this property of water to
living organisms?
Ans. Definition: It is the amount of heat
required to change a liquid to gas.
Heat of vaporization of water: Water has
high heat of vaporization. It absorbs much
heat while changing from liquid state to gas.
Its heat of vaporization is 574 Kcal/kg
which means a considerable amount of heat
energy (574 Kcal) is required to change 1kg
of liquid water into vapours.
Cooling Effect: Due to this property.
Earth's temperature is kept moderate. It also
provides cooling effects to plants and

animals when they transpire and perspire
(sweat).
• Every gram of water that evaporates from
plant or animals' body surface removes
574 calories of heat from the body.
Q25. Define cohesion. How it is
important for living world? How strider
walks on water?
Ans. Hydrogen bonds among water
molecules enable them to "stick together".
This type of attraction between same type of
molecules is called cohesion.
• Inside water, molecules have high
cohesion. The cohesion of water is
important for living world.
• Plants depend on cohesion among water
molecules for the transport of water and
nutrients from roots to leaves. The
evaporation of water from a leaf exerts a
pulling force on water within xylem
vessels of the leaf. As a result, water rises
against the force of gravity.
• High surface tension: Hydrogen bonds
also give water high surface tension.
Water behaves as if it were coated with
some invisible film. The insect water-
strider walks on water without breaking
surface.
Q26. Briefly describe ionization of water
and its significance.
Ans. Ionization of water: When the
covalent bonds among the atoms of water
molecule break, water is ionized to form
hydrogen ions (H⁺) and hydroxyl ions (OH⁻).
At normal conditions, this reaction is
reversible and equilibrium is maintained. At
room temperature (25°C), in a litre of water
one molecule out of each 550 million is
ionized and thus the concentration of each of
H⁺ and OH⁻ in pure water remains at 10⁻⁷
moles/litre.
Significance: H⁺ and OH⁻ ions take part in
many chemical reactions in the cells e.g.,

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 7 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

hydrolysis of macromolecules. Relative
concentrations of H+ and OH- ions
determine the acidity and alkalinity of
medium i.e., pH of medium. The pH affects
the biochemical reactions. Enzymes work
best at specific pH.
Q27. What is the effect of temperature
on density of water? How it is beneficial
for sustaining aquatic life?
Ans. Effect of temperature on density
Water exhibits its maximum density at
4°C. Its density decreases when the
temperature lowers. It is because of the
hydrogen bonds which keep water
molecules relatively far apart. When
temperature falls to 0°C, water freezes but
the resulting ice is less dense than liquid
water, because at this temperature, hydrogen
bonding keeps water molecules further apart
than in liquid water.
Significance for aquatic life: In rivers,
streams or lakes, ice is formed on the
surface water due to falling of temperature.
As ice is less dense than water, it floats on
surface. It acts as an insulator and does not
allow heat to escape from the water beneath
it. In this way aquatic organisms are
protected.
Carbohydrates
Q28. Define carbohydrates. Write their
empirical formula and classify them.
Ans. Carbohydrate are naturally occurring
organic compounds. The word
“carbohydrate” literally means “hydrated
carbon”. Carbohydrates are synthesized as
the primary products of photosynthesis.
During photosynthesis, when reduction of
CO2 occurs, the resulting carbohydrate
molecule contains carbon, hydrogen and
oxygen in the molar ratio of 1:2:1.
Empirical formula: Their empirical
formula is C(H2O)n where ‘n’ is the number
of carbon atoms.
Classification of Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are classified into three
groups:
1. Monosaccharides
2. Disaccharides
3. Polysaccharides.
Q29. Characterize and classify monosaccharides with examples.
Ans. Monosaccharides: Monosaccharides (simple sugars) are made of single sugar
molecule. They are easily soluble in water. They may have 3 – 7 carbon atoms. They are
further classified into subgroups on the basis of number of carbon atoms.
Classification of monosaccharides
Monosaccharides Carbon atoms Formula Examples
Trioses 3 C3H6O3 Glyceraldehyde, Dihydroxyacetone
Tetroses 4 C4H8O4 Erythrose, Erythulose (intermediate in
photosynthesis in bacteria)
Pentoses 5 C5H10O5 Ribose, Deoxyribose (C5H10O4),
Ribulose
Hexoses 6 C6H12O6 Glucose, Fructose, Galactose
Heptoses 7 C7H14O7 Rare in nature (intermediate in
photosynthesis)

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 8 ---
Q30. Draw the Fischer projections of
glucose, fructose, galactose and ribose.
Aldose Ketose Aldose
H H H
C C C
H C OH H C OH H C OH
HO C H HO C H HO C H
H C OH H C OH HO C H
H C OH H C OH H C OH
H C OH H C OH H C OH
H H H
Glucose Fructose Galactose
Aldose
H
C=O
H C OH
H C OH
H C OH
H C OH
H
Ribose

Q31. Differentiate between alpha D-
glucose and Beta D glucose. / Starch and
cellulose both are the polymers of glucose,
then why they are different molecules /
polysaccharides.
Ans. There are two forms of D-glucose
i.e., alpha D-glucose and beta D-glucose.
They differ only in the direction of OH
groups on carbon 1.
α-D-glucose: The α-D-glucose has OH
group on the lower side.
β-D-glucose: The β-D-glucose has OH on
above side.
When many alpha D-glucose molecules join
together, they form a polymer called starch.
When many beta D-glucose molecules join
together, they form a polymer called
cellulose.
Q32. Compare the Fischer and Haworth
projections. / Which two ways are used to
represent the structure of sugar
molecules?
Ans. Fischer and Haworth projections are
two ways to represent the structure of sugar
molecules.
Fischer projection: The Fischer projection
was devised by German chemist Emil
Fischer in 1891, In a Fischer projection the
carbohydrate is shown in its open chain
form, rather than a cyclical one.
Haworth projection: The Haworth
projection is named after British Chemist Sir
Norman Haworth. It shows sugars in their
cyclic forms.
Q33. Define disaccharides. How
disaccharides are formed? Name
physiologically important disaccharides.

Ans. Disaccharides: They are made from
two monosaccharides by the process of
dehydration synthesis.
Glycosidic bond: The covalent bond
between two monosaccharides is called
glycosidic bond.
Hydrolysis: On hydrolysis, they yield
monosaccharide monomers, of which they
are made.
Solubility: As compared to
monosaccharides, they are less soluble in
water. Physiologically important
disaccharides are:
i. Maltose (Malt Sugar)
ii. Lactose (Milk Sugar)
iii. Sucrose (Cane Sugar)

--- Page 9 ---
Q34. Differentiate between maltose and lactose.
Maltose
• It is made up of two glucose monomers.
• The glucose molecules are attached by 1,4-glycosidic bond between carbon 1 of one and carbon 4 of the other glucose.
• It is found in many cereals (wheat, corn etc.) and is also formed (as an intermediate product) during the digestion of starch.
6CH2OH 6CH2OH
H C5 O H H C5 O H
4C H 1 4C H 1
H OH H C H C OH
HO 3C 2C 3C 2C OH
H OH H OH
1, 4-glycosidic linkage

Lactose
• It is made up of one glucose and one galactose subunit.
• It is galactose 1-4 glucose.
• It is found only in mammalian milk, and is the main source of energy for infant mammals.
6CH2OH 6CH2OH
OH C5 O H H C5 O H
4C H 1 4C H 1
H OH H C O H OH H
3C 2C 3C 2C OH
H OH H OH
Galactose 1, 4-glycosidic linkage Galactose
subunit subunit

Q35. Draw the structure of sucrose.
Also write its formula and importance.

Ans. Composition: It is made up of one glucose and one fructose subunits i.e., it is glucose 1, 2-fructose.
Structure: It is the most familiar disaccharide and is also known as table sugar. It acts as a sweetener in our food.
6CH2OH
OH C5 O H O 6CH2OH
4C H 1 2C H C5
H OH H HOCH2 H
3C 2C 3C 4C
Glucose H OH H OH
subunit Fructose
1, 2-glycosidic linkage subunit

Formula: Its molecular formula is (C11H22O11).
Importance: It is found in phloem vessels of higher plants where it acts as a transport product for the conduction of glucose to and from different parts of plant. That is why it is also known as transport disaccharide.
★Q36. High-fructose corn syrup is better than sucrose extract. Justify?
Ans. High fructose corn syrup is better than sucrose extract because it is cheaper and sweeter. In 1980's a method was developed to convert the glucose of corn starch into fructose which is sweeter than sucrose. Now this syrup is widely being used in food and soft-drinks.
Q37. What are polysaccharides? Name some important polysaccharides.
Ans. The type of polysaccharides which upon hydrolysis yield many (more than 10) monosaccharide subunits are called polysaccharides.
Characteristics
➢ They are most complex and most abundant carbohydrates.
➢ Tasteless and sparingly soluble in water.
Important polysaccharides: Important polysaccharides include starch, glycogen, cellulose, pectin, lignin, chitin, agar and murein.

--- Page 10 ---
Q38. Differentiate between amylose and
amylopectin. Why are they broken down
at different rates?
Amylose
• Amylose is a
chain made of
glucose
monomers (with
1,4-glycosidic
linkages).
• It is straight and
unbranched.
However, it
tends to coil up
into a helix.
Amylopectin
• Amylopectin is
also a chain of
glucose monomers
(with 1,4-
glycosidic
linkages).
• It has branches
(with 1,6-
glycosidic
linkages).
Both amylase and amylopectin are
broken down by amylase at different rates
because of their structure. Amylopectin
being is branched having more ends, that's
why it is broken more quickly by amylases
as compared to unbranched amylose.
Q39. Glycogen is similar in structure to
amylopectin. Justify? Write its
occurrence.
Ans. Similarity with amylopectin
It is similar in structure to amylopectin. It is
a chain of glucose monomers (with 1,4-
glycosidic linkages) with branches (with
1,6-glycosidic linkages).
Occurrence: It is made by animals as their
storage polysaccharide, and is found
mainly in muscles and liver.
Breakdown: Because it is so highly
branched, it can be broken down to glucose
very quickly.
Glycogen
Q40. Draw the structure of starch and
cellulose.
Q41. Starch forms granules while
cellulose make fibrils. Comment.
Ans. The alpha 1-4 glucose polymer in
starch coils up to form granules. On the
other hand, the beta 1-4 glucose polymer in
cellulose forms straight chains. Hundreds
of these chains are linked together by
hydrogen bonds to form cellulose
microfibrils. These microfibrils make
cellulose fibrils.
Significance: They are very strong and
rigid, and give strength to plant cells, and
therefore to young plants and also to
materials such as paper, cotton etc.
★Q42.Starch and cellulose are formed by
glucose monomers, then why does
amylase cannot break / act on cellulose?
Ans. The beta-glycosidic bond cannot
be broken by amylase. It requires a specific
cellulase enzyme. Some bacteria and some
protozoans are only organisms that possess
cellulase enzyme. Herbivore animals, like
cows and termites whose diet is mainly
cellulose, have mutualistic bacteria in their
guts. These bacteria digest their cellulose.
Humans cannot digest cellulose, and it is
referred to as dietary fibre.
Q43. Chitin has glucose monomers and
same glycosidic linkage, as in cellulose.
Then why are they different?
Ans. Like cellulose, chitin is also a
polymer of glucose. The linkage between

--- Page 11 ---
glucose monomers is also like that found in
cellulose. However, in chitin each glucose
molecule has been modified by the addition
of a nitrogen-containing group. Only few
organisms can digest it.
Part of chitin molecule
Proteins
Q44. Define proteins. Who coined the
term protein?
Ans. Proteins are the most abundant
organic compounds in cell, which are
defined as the polymers of amino acids.
J. Berzelius (in 1938) coined the term
"protein" (Greek "Proteios"- molecules of
the first rank) to emphasize the importance
of this group.
Q45. Draw the structures of glycine and
alanine.
Ans. Glycine Alanine
Q46. Differentiate between essential and
non-essential amino acids?
Essential Amino Non-essential
acids Amino acids
The amino acids Out of 20 amino
which are not acids, our bodies
synthesized by our can make eleven
body are called amino acids. These
essential amino are called non-
acids. essential amino
The nine amino acids alanine,
acids cannot make arginine,
our bodies on its asparagine, aspartic
own and must obtain acid, cysteine,
these amino acids by glutamic acid,
eating various foods. glutamine, glycine,
These are called proline, serine, and
essential amino tyrosine.
acids. methionine,
valine, tryptophan,
isoleucine, leucine,
lysine, threonine,
phenylalanine and
histidine (necessary
only for babies).
Q47. Name 11 essential and 9 non-
essential amino acids.
Ans. Non-Essential amino acids
Alanine, arginine, asparagine, aspartic acid,
cysteine, glutamic acid, glutamine, glycine,
proline, serine and tyrosine.
Essential amino acids
Methionine, valine, tryptophan, isoleucine,
leucine, lysine, threonine, histidine and
phenylalanine.
Q48. How glycylalanine is formed?
Ans. The amino acids, which are linked
by peptide bond, are called peptides. A
dipeptide is formed by the linkage of two
amino acids. For example, glycylalanine (a
dipeptide) is formed by the linking of
glycine and alanine.
Formation of petide bond between glycine
and alanine
Q49. Differentiate between peptide,
dipeptide, polypeptide and protein.
Ans. Peptide: The amino acids which are
linked by peptide bond are called peptides.

--- Page 12 ---
Dipeptide: When two amino acids are linked by peptide bond, its is called a dipeptide e.g. glycylalanine.
Polypeptide: Addition of aminoacids in a dipeptide (because both ends of dipeptide are reactive) ultimately leads to the formation of a chain, is called polypeptide chain.
Protein: When one or more polypeptide chains assume different shapes on the basis of number, types and sequence of amino acids, forms protein molecule.
Q50. How a protein attains its primary structure? Why does the primary structure play a crucial role in functioning of a protein?
Ans. The primary structure of a protein molecule is formed by the linear arrangement of amino acids. It represents the number and sequence of amino molecules in a polypeptide chain.
• All protein molecules (whether simple or complex) have specific primary structures.
• Crucial role: The number, sequence and types of amino acids is highly specific in the primary structure of a protein, for its proper functioning. This specificity in primary structure is determined by the order of nucleotides in DNA. Any change results in abnormal protein that fails to carry out its normal function, e.g., in sickle cell anemia occurs due to problem in primary structure of β-chain of hemoglobin.
Q51. How sickle cell anaemia is caused? At which level mistake / mutation occurs?

Ans. Sickle cell haemoglobin is formed by a mistake in the arrangement of only one amino acid in position six in each beta chain. In sickle cell haemoglobin, amino acid valine is present in the place of glutamic acid. Due to sickle cell haemoglobin, red blood cells get sickle shapes and abnormal haemoglobin cannot transport sufficient oxygen. This disease is known as sickle cell anaemia.
Q52. Describe the secondary structure of proteins. Which bond plays crucial role in maintaining secondary structure?

Ans. In many proteins, folding or coiling patterns occur within a polypeptide chain. This structure is called secondary structure.
Coiling of a polypeptide chain results in alpha helix while folding makes a pleated sheet. Both these structures are maintained by hydrogen bonds between amino and carboxyl groups of nearby amino acids in the chain.
Q53. How a protein attains tertiary level or organization? Name the bonds which maintain tertiary structure.
Ans. When the secondary structure further folds up and gets a complicated globular shape, it is called the tertiary structure of protein. These are more complex proteins. The globular shape is maintained by ionic, hydrogen and disulphide bonds.
Q54. How tertiary structure of proteins is made stable?
Ans. Amino acids in a polypeptide chain interact with water to give the most stable tertiary structure in the form of a globular shape. These are hydrophilic and hydrophobic interactions. The hydrophobic (non-polar) amino acids aggregate in such a way that they disrupt hydrogen bonding of water molecules and so are buried inside. At the same time the hydrophilic (polar) amino acids turn out, towards the surface of water.
Q55. Elaborate the quaternary structure of proteins. Name the bonds which maintain it.

--- Page 13 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Ans. When two or more polypeptide chains with tertiary structures are held together by hydrophobic interactions, hydrogen bonds and ionic bonds, they form most complex proteins. This aggregation of tertiary structures makes the quaternary structure of protein.
Q56. Compare fibrous and globular proteins in terms of.
i) Shape ii) Structure iii) Role iv) Examples

| Characteristics | Fibrous Proteins | Globular Proteins |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Characteristics** | **Fibrous Proteins** | **Globular Proteins** |
| **Shape** | In the form of fibrils | Spherical or ellipsoidal |
| **Structure** | Primary or secondary | Tertiary or quaternary |
| **Role** | Structural | Functional |
| **Examples** | Silk fibre-form the webs of silk worm and spider<br>Actin in muscle cells<br>Fibrin – in blood clots<br>Keratin – in nails, hairs, beak, skin etc<br>Collagen – in matrix of connective tissues | Enzymes – biocatalyst<br>Antibodies – active against invading antigens<br>Hormones – regulate body’s activities<br>Haemoglobin – oxygen carrying protein |

Lipids
★Q57. Define ester. Classify lipids.
Ans. An ester is the compound produced as the result of a chemical reaction of an alcohol with an acid and a water molecule is released.
C₂H₅OH+ CH₃COOH → C₂H₅OCOCH₃ + H₂O
Classification of lipids: Acylglycerols, waxes, phospholipids, terpenes, steroids and prostaglandins.
Q58. Differentiate between fats and oils also write their occurrence. / Why animal fats contain more energy than do plant oils?
Ans. Animals fats have more energy than plant oils because, they have more number of saturated fatty acids, so more the number of CH-bonds, hence more energy than unsaturated fatty acids with lower number of CH-bonds in plant oils.

| Fats | Oils |
| :--- | :--- |
| • The acylglycerols which are solid at room temperature, are called fats.<br>• In animals, most acylglycerols are fats e.g., butter, meat and fat. | • The acylglycerols which are liquid at room temperature, are called oils.<br>• In plants, most acylglycerols are oil: for example, peanut oil, corn oil, castor oil. |

Q59. Define acylglycerols. Name the acylglycerol found most widely.
Ans. Chemically, acylglycerols are the esters of fatty acids and alcohol. They are synthesized through dehydration synthesis (H is released from alcohol and OH from an acid) as shown below.
C₂H₅OH+ HOOCCH₃ → C₂H₅OCOCH₃ + H₂O
alcohol acetic acid an ester (ethylacetate)
The most widely found acylglycerols are triacylglycerol (triglycerides), also called neutral lipids. In triacylglycerols, three

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 14 ---
molecules of fatty acid (same or different)
are joined to a single glycerol backbone.
Q60. Define fatty acids and glycerol.
Ans. Glycerol: It is a 3C alcohol and each
of its carbon bears a hydroxyl group. The 3
carbons of glycerol form the backbone of
acylglycerol molecule, to which three fatty
acids are attached.
Fatty acids: These are responsible for all
the characteristics of acylglycerols. Fatty
acids are long hydrocarbon chains (with
carbon in even number 4 – 30), ending in a
carboxyl (-COOH) group. They vary in
length and may be as straight chains (in
animals) or branched or ringed (in plants).
Q61. between saturated and unsaturated fatty acids.
| Saturated fatty acids | Unsaturated fatty acids |
| :--- | :--- |
| • Saturated fatty acids contain no double bond in their hydrocarbon chain. | • Unsaturated fatty acids have double bonds (6 maximum) between one or more pairs of carbon atoms. |
| • In saturated fatty acids, all internal carbon atoms possess hydrogen side- groups. | • The double bonds replace some of the hydrogen atoms. Therefore, unsaturated fatty acids contain fewer number of hydrogen atoms. |
| • These fatty acids make straight chains, and have a high melting point e.g., butyric acid, palmitic acid. | • These fatty acids form bent chains, and have a low melting point. |

Q62. Write only examples of fibrous and globular proteins.
| Characteristics | Fibrous Proteins | Globular Proteins |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Examples | Silk fibre-form the webs of silk and spider Actin in muscle cells Fibrin in skin etc. | Enzymes – biocatalyst antibodies active against invading antigens. |
| | Collagen in matrix of connective tissues | Hormones – regulate body’s activities. |
| | | Haemoglobin – oxygen carrying protein |

Q63. Describe the role of sodium
potassium pump in a cell.
Ans. Channel proteins in the membranes
of cells control the movement of materials in
and out of cells. For example, proteins make
sodium- potassium pump in the cell
membrane of neurons. This pump controls
the movement of Na⁺ and K⁺ ions in and
out of nerve cell.
Q64. Which class of proteins are
involved in transport of materials? Justify
with examples.
Ans. Some globular proteins work to
transport different materials throughout the
body. For example; haemoglobin and
myoglobin transport O₂ and some CO₂, and
cytochromes work in electron transport
chain as electron carriers.
★Q65. How blood ferritin levels are
significant as a diagnostic tool of
anaemia?
Ans. Blood ferritin levels are measured in
patients as a diagnostic tool of anaemia. If
ferritin is high, there is iron in excess. If
ferritin is low, there is a risk for lack of iron
which sooner or later lead to anaemia.

--- Page 15 ---
Q66. Write down the functions of
proteins given below.
(i) Repressors (ii) Antibodies
(iii) Albumin (iv) Fibrinogen
Ans. (i) Repressors are the proteins that
regulate gene action by preventing the
synthesis of RNA. These proteins allow
genes to work where and when required.
(ii) Antibodies are important proteins. They
recognize and combine with foreign
substances (antigens) and convert them into
harmless products.
(iii) Ion-binding proteins store ions in
different parts of body. For example, ferritin
is the main intracellular iron storage protein.
Similarly, casein is a milk protein that stores
potassium and calcium ions.
(iv) Blood clotting is important to prevent
the loss of blood after an injury.
(v) Fibrinogen protein is present in blood.
When an injury occurs, fibrinogen is
activated into fibrin. The fibrin makes fibres
and a clot is formed.
Q67. What is the difference between
mono-unsaturated and poly-unsaturated
fatty acids?
Ans. If a fatty acid has one double bond it
is called mono-unsaturated e.g., oleic acid. If
there are more than one double bond, it is
called poly-unsaturated e.g., linoleic acid.
Q68. Write an equation showing the
formation of triacylglycerol.
Dehydration synthesis of a traicylglycerol
Q69. Write the chemical composition of
waxes.
Ans. They are mixtures of
• Long chain alkanes (with carbon atoms in
odd number; 25-35),
• Alcohols (other than glycerol), ketones
• Long chain fatty acids.

Q70. Describe the roles of waxes played
in living organisms.
Ans. Waxes are chemically inert. Like
other lipids, waxes are strongly
hydrophobic. They act as protective
coverings and water barriers for living
organisms. Waxes are widespread as
protective coatings on fruits and leaves.
Some animals like insects, birds, sheep etc.
also secrete waxes over their skin.
Waxes are used to waterproof paper and
cards. Waxes are also used in wax polishes
for furniture, footwear and vehicles. Waxes
are also used to make candles. Waxes with
coloured pigments are used in making
crayons and coloured pencils.
Q71. Draw the structure of
Phosphatidylcholine.
Q72. Define phospholipids. Write their
common examples.
Ans. Chemically they are the derivatives
of phosphatidic acid. Phosphatidic acid is
composed of one glycerol, two fatty acids
and one phosphoric acid (phosphate). Any
nitrogenous base e.g., choline, ethanolamine
or serine attaches with its phosphoric acid
and makes phospholipid.
Examples: Common examples are
phosphatidyl choline (lecithin), phosphatidyl
ethanolamine and phosphatidyl serine.
Phosphatidyl choline forms lipid bilayer in
plasma membranes.

--- Page 16 ---
Q73. What are terpenes? Write its
molecules formula and importance.

Ans. It is a very large and diverse group of
lipids. All terpenes are made of isoprene
units. An isoprene unit is a branched
unsaturated hydrocarbon chain with the
formula CH₂=C(CH₃)–CH=CH₂.
Importance: Terpenes form many
biologically important pigments, such as
chlorophyll in plants and retinal pigments in
eyes. Vitamin A and rubber are also
terpenes.
Q74. Draw the structure of an isoprene
unit.
CH₃
|
C CH₂
/ \
CH₂ C
|
H
Isoprene unit
Q75. Write few lines about steroids.

Ans. Steroids: Steroids are lipids whose
carbon skeleton is bent to form four fused
rings. All steroids have the same ring pattern
i.e., three 6-cornored rings and one 5-
cornored ring. Cholesterol is a common
steroid in animal cell membranes. Animal
cells also use it for making other steroids
e.g., male and female sex hormones.
★Q76. Why anabolic steroids are banned
today?
Ans. In 1950s some pharmaceutical
companies produced anabolic steroids for
the treatment of general anaemia. Some
athletes began using anabolic steroids to
build-up their muscles quickly and enhance
their performance. Today, anabolic steroids
are banned. Anabolic steroids can cause
serious physical and mental problems e.g.,
deep depression, liver damage sweating,
insomnia rest less.
Q77. What are prostaglandins? Write
their important functions.
Ans. Prostaglandins are a group of lipids
that are modified fatty acids, with non-
polar tails attached to a five-carbon ring.
Importance: They occur in many tissues of
vertebrates, where they act as local
chemical messengers. Some of them
stimulate smooth muscles to contract and
relax; others constrict or expand the
diameter of blood vessels. They are also
involved in inflammatory response to
infection.
Q78. Discuss some important roles of
lipids in life.
Ans. Lipids are important sources of
energy (ATP).
In fact, lipids are the most energy rich of all
nutrients. One gram of lipids provides 9.5
kilocalories of energy. The same amount of
protein provides 5.6 kilocalories while that
of carbohydrate provides 4.1 kilocalories.
• Lipids are essential components of all
cellular and subcellular membranes.
They serve as biological carriers for the
absorption of fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E
and K.
• Lipids are a source of fatty acids, which
are essential for various metabolisms.
Lipids play a role as a mechanical
cushion/support for vital body organs.
• The lipids (fats) present beneath skin,
insulate the body from extreme
temperatures.
Q79. Quote some important biological
functions of steroids. / Write important
functions of cholesterol.
Ans. Steroids perform a wide range of
important biological functions. For example,
cholesterol is involved in the maintenance

--- Page 17 ---
of membranes. It also helps in lipid
transport. It as a precursor of vitamin D, bile
acids and steroid hormones (androgens,
estrogens), adrenal hormones and
corticosteroids.
Nucleic Acids
Q80. Write down the location of RNA
and DNA.
Ans. DNA is found mainly in
chromosomes, with small amounts in
mitochondria and chloroplasts.
RNA is found in nucleolus, ribosomes and
cytosol.
Q81. Differentiate between purines and
pyrimidines.
Pyrimidine
Purines
Pyrimidine is a Purine is a double
single ringed ring nitrogenous
nitrogenous base. base. Both DNA &
There are three RNA contain two
pyrimidine bases in purine bases i.e.,
nucleic acids. adenine (A) and
Cytosine (C) is guanine (G).
present in both DNA
and RNA, thymine
(T) is present only in
DNA, and uracil (U)
is present only in
RNA.
Q82. Draw the sketch of adenine and
nucleotide.
Q83. Sketch a dinucleotide. / Sketch NAD
(Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide)
Q84. Draw the sketch of ATP.
Q85. What do you know about NAD?
Give its importance.
Ans. Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide
(NAD) is a co-enzyme. It acts as a
hydrogen acceptor in oxidation-reduction
reactions in cell.
Q86. Briefly describe Watson and Crick
model of DNA.
Ans. Watson and Crick's Model of DNA
suggests the following points:
DNA is made of two polynucleotide chains
or strands.

--- Page 18 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

• The two strands are coiled around each
other and make a double helix.
• The double helix is like a ladder. Its poles
are made of sugars and phosphate groups.
Its rungs are made of nitrogenous base
pairs.
• Each base pair (rung) is made of one
purine (A or G) and one pyrimidine (C
or T) base.
• Two strands are held together by weak
hydrogen bonds between their bases.
Q89. Differentiate between mRNA and tRNA.
Messenger RNA (mRNA)
• It consists of a single strand of
ribonucleotides.
• Its sequence of nucleotides is
complimentary to the sequence of
nucleotides of one of the strands of
DNA.
• mRNA is about 3-4% of the total
amount of RNA in cell.
• It carries the genetic message of DNA to
ribosomes to form particular protein.

Q90. What is ribosomal RNA? Write its
importance.
Ans. It is synthesized by the DNA of
nucleoli. After its synthesis, ribosomal RNA
is joined with ribosomal protein and
ribosomes are formed. It comprises about
80% of the total RNA in cell. rRNA acts as
the machinery for synthesis of proteins in
ribosomes.
Q91. Differentiate between
transcription and translation.
Ans. Transcription: The transfer of
information from DNA to RNA, which
occurs when an RNA copy of the gene is
produced. The process is called
transcription.
Translation: The second step of the central
dogma is the transfer of information form
RNA to proteins, which occurs when the
information contained in the RNA is DNA

★Q87.Which information was provided
by Erin Chargaff?
Ans. In 1951 Erwin Chargaff provided an
informative data and it was found that
adenine and thymine are equal in ratio in
DNA and so are guanine and cytosine.
Q88. Define a gene.
Ans. A gene is a sequence of nucleotides
of DNA which codes for the formation of a
particular polypeptide.

Transfer RNA (tRNA)
• It is comparatively small.
• It is a helical structure and its molecule
resembles a clover leaf.
• It consists of 10-15% of the total amount
of RNA in cell.
• tRNAs transport amino acids to ribosome
and mRNA, in the process of protein
synthesis.

controls the properties and activities of a
cell.
Conjugated Molecules
Q92. How conjugated molecules are
formed?
Ans. Conjugated molecules are formed by
the combination of two or more molecules
belonging to different categories. Some
important conjugated molecules are as
follows.
• Glycoproteins (e.g., They are formed by
covalent linkage between a protein and a
carbohydrate polymer.)
• Glycolipids (e.g., They are formed by
covalent linkage between a lipid and a
carbohydrate.)
• Lipoproteins
• Nucleoproteins

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 19 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q93. Compare glycoproteins and
glycolipids in terms of definition and
functions.
Ans. Glycoproteins
They are formed by covalent linkage
between a protein and a carbohydrate
polymer. They occur widely in nature as
integral structural component of membranes;
in blood serum; as cellular secretions; and in
cartilage, eyes, skin etc.
Glycolipids
They are formed by a covalent linkage
between a lipid and a carbohydrate. They
are an integral structural component of
membranes.

Q94. Define Lipoproteins. Describe
their importance in cells.
Ans. They are a class of biomolecules
which are formed by hydrophobic
interactions (not covalent or ionic bonds)
between lipids and proteins.
Importance: Lipoproteins are the basic
structural framework of all types of plasma
membranes. Lipids are transported in blood
as very low-density lipoproteins.
Q95. How nucleoproteins are formed?
Describe their roles in cells.
Ans. They are formed by ionic bonds
between chromosomal DNA and proteins.
• For example, histone proteins are bound
to DNA to form nucleosomes.
• Role: They stabilize chromosomal
structure in eukaryotes and also play an
important role in the regulation of gene
expression.

LONG QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)
Q1. Distinguish carbohydrates,
proteins, lipids and nucleic acid as the
four fundamental biological molecules.
Ans. See Q5., Q9., Q13., and Q16. of
theory.
Q2. Describe and draw sketches of
dehydration synthesis reactions.
Ans. See Q3. of theory.
Q3. Explain how the properties of
water make it the medium of life
Ans. See Q4. of theory.
Q4. Distinguish the properties of water
make it the medium of life.
Ans. See Q5. of theory.
Q5. Compare the properties and roles
of monosaccharides and classify them.
Ans. See Q6. of theory.
Q6. Compare the structural isomers
and stereoisomers of glucose.
Ans. See Q7. of theory.
Q7. Define proteins and amino acids
and outline the synthesis and breakage of
peptide linkages.
Ans. See Q9. of theory.

Q8. Justify the significance of the
sequence of amino acids through the
example of sickle cell haemoglobin.
Ans. See Q10. of theory.
Q9. Describe the properties and role of
acylglycerols, phospholipids, terpenes and
waxes.
Ans. See Q13. of theory.
Q10. Describe the molecular level
structure of nucleotide.
Ans. See Q17. of theory.
Q11. Explain the double helical
structure of DNA as proposed by Watson
and Crick.
Ans. See Q18. of theory.
Q12. Explain the general structure of
RNA and differentiate between the three
types of RNA.
Ans. See Q20. of theory.
Q13. Define conjugated molecules and
describe the roles of common conjugated
molecules.
Ans. See Q22. of theory.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 20 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

INQUISITIVE QUESTIONS
Q1. What happens if even one amino acid is substituted for another in a polypeptide
chain? Provide a specific example.
Ans. The number, sequence and types of amino acids is highly specific in the primary
structure of a protein, for its proper functioning. This specificity in primary structure is
determined by the order of nucleotides in DNA. Any change results in abnormal protein that
fails to carry out its normal function.
For example, sickle cell haemoglobin is formed by a mistake in the arrangement of only
one amino acid in position six in each beta chain. In sickle cell haemoglobin, amino acid
valine is present in the place of glutamic acid. Due to sickle cell haemoglobin, red blood cell
get stickle shapes and abnormal haemoglobin cannot transport sufficient oxygen. This
disease is known as sickle cell anaemia.

[IMAGE CONTENT]

Q2. How does the three dimensional structure of a protein relate to its function?
Ans. The structure of a protein depends upon number of amino acids, sequence of amino
acids and the final shape it attains after folding, which is maintained by chemical bonds.
Amino acids in a polypeptide chain interact with water to give the most stable tertiary
structure in the form of a globular shape. These are hydrophilic and hydrophobic
interactions. The hydrophobic (non-polar) amino acids aggregate in such a way that they
disrupt hydrogen bonding of water molecules and so are buried inside. At the same time the
hydrophilic (polar) amino acids turn out, towards the surface of water.
Q3. How do nucleic acids encode genetic information and how is this information
translated into proteins?
Ans. Central Dogma: All organisms use the same basic mechanism of reading and
expressing genes, which is often referred to as central dogma.
• First step: The first step of central dogma is the transfer of information from DNA to
RNA, which occurs when an RNA copy of the gene is produced. The process is called
transcription.
• Second step: The second step of the central dogma is the transfer of information from
RNA to proteins, which occurs when the information contained in the RNA is used to
direct the synthesis of proteins. This process is called translation. In this way DNA
controls the properties and activities of a cell.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch4 Short Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [22/36]: 11th Bio New Ch5 Long Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 5: Enzymes

Long Questions

DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONS

ENZYME
Q1. Describe the structure of enzymes, explaining the role and component parts
of the active site.
Ans. Definition: Enzymes may be defined as specific globular proteins that speed up
specific chemical reactions by lowering the required activation energy, but remain
unaltered in the process. Enzymes are also known as biocatalysts. Rates of enzyme-catalysed
reactions may be 10³ to 10⁸ times greater than the rates of corresponding uncatalyzed
reactions.
Structure: Enzymes are three-dimensional globular proteins. They are made of polypeptide
chains that are coiled upon themselves.
Active site: There is a small cleft or depression on the surface of globular enzyme molecule.
It consists of only a few amino acids. This site is known as active site. It is the location at
which catalysis occurs.
Shape: The shape of active site of each enzyme is very specific. So, only a certain substrate
molecule can fit into it. It is three-dimensional and bears a specific charge.
Regions: Active site has two distinct regions i.e., binding site and catalytic site.
(i) Binding site: Substrate molecule fits into binding site by weak chemical forces, such as
hydrogen bonds.
(ii) Catalytic site: It catalyses the reaction and substrate is transformed into products
COFACTORS AND COENZYMES
Q2. Differentiate among the three types of
co-factors by giving examples.
Ans. Cofactors: Many enzymes use additional chemical
components to aid in catalysis. These additional non-protein
components are called cofactors.
Types: There are three kinds of cofactors: metal ions,
prosthetic groups and coenzymes.
(i) Metal ions: Many enzymes use metal ions, such as Ca⁺²,
Mg⁺², Mn⁺², Cu⁺², and Zn⁺² as their cofactors. These
metal ions change the non-functional active sites of

Fig: Cofactors changing the
shape of active site

★ Note: All questions and paragraphs marked with a star ★ are explanations of the Box
Information provided in the textbook.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
enzymes into functional sites. The attachment of a cofactor also changes the shape of
enzyme and allows it to combine with substrate.
Many trace elements such as molybdenum and manganese, which are necessary for our
health, are used by enzymes as cofactors.
(ii) Prosthetic Groups: Some cofactors form covalent bonds with enzyme and are known as
prosthetic groups. Prosthetic group may be an organic compound e.g., hematin. Hematin
also known as heme, is a part of hemoglobin and myoglobin, it acts as prosthetic group in
enzymes like catalyses and peroxidases.
(iii)Coenzyme: When the cofactor is a non-protein organic molecule and is loosely attached
with enzyme, it is called a coenzyme. Coenzymes participate in enzyme-catalysed
reactions, often by transporting electrons (hydrogen atoms), from one enzyme to another.
• Many vitamins (e.g., niacin (vitamin B3) and riboflavin (vitamin B2)) function as
coenzymes. Some are part of coenzymes. The most important coenzyme in cell is the
hydrogen acceptor Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide (NAD+).
Role of NAD+ in a cell
When NAD+ acquires a hydrogen atom from an enzyme, it reduces to NADH. The electron
of hydrogen atom contains energy that NADH molecule carries. For example, when food is
oxidized in cell, enzymes draw electrons from food molecules and transfer them to NAD+,
which reduces to NADH.
Q3. Define activation energy and Explain through graph, how an enzyme
speeds up a reaction by lowering activation energy?
Ans. The speed of a chemical reaction depends on the amount of activation energy required
to initiate it. Activation energy is the energy which works to destabilize existing chemical
bonds.
Effect of enzymes on activation
energy: Enzymes bring reactants
together in correct orientation or
stress particular chemical bonds of
reactants. Thus, they lower the
activation energy required for new
bonds to form and speed up the rate
of reactions. Reactions proceed much
faster than their normal speed.
Effect on End Product: The
presence of enzymes does not affect
the nature or properties of end
products. For example, sucrose
(substrate) will always be hydrolysed into glucose and fructose (products) whether Sucrase
(enzyme) is present or not.
Enzymes Substrate Complex: Due to its specificity, an enzyme recognizes a specific
substrate. The substrate binds with the active site of enzyme. In this way, an enzyme-substrate
complex (ES complex) is formed and catalytic site is activated. The atoms of catalytic site
stress and destabilize particular bonds of substrate. So, activation energy is lowered. This

--- Page 3 ---
action initiates the reaction and substrate is transformed into products. After it, enzyme
detaches itself from the products, in an unaltered state.
E + S ES E + P
Enzyme Substrate Enzyme-Substrate Enzyme Product
complex
Q4. Explain the mechanism of enzyme action through induced fit model. Also
compare it with lock and key model of enzyme action.
Ans. Enzyme-substrate complex: Due to its specificity, an enzyme recognizes a specific
substrate. The substrate binds with the active site of enzyme. In this way, an enzyme-substrate
complex (ES complex) is formed and catalytic site is activated. The atoms of catalytic site
stress and destabilize particular bonds of substrate. So, activation energy is lowered. This
action initiates the reaction and substrate is transformed into products. After it, enzyme
detaches itself from the products, in an unaltered state. The mechanism of enzyme action can
be summarized as follows.
E + S ES E + P
Enzyme Substrate Enzyme-Substrate Enzyme Product
complex
Models for Mechanism of Action of Enzymes
1. Lock and key Model
History: In 1894 a German chemist Emil Fischer proposed lock-and-key model. According
to this model, “as a specific key can open only a specific lock, in the same manner a specific
enzyme can transform only one specific substrate into products”.
Postulates: This model postulates that active site is a rigid structure and there is no
modification or flexibility in it before, during or after the enzyme action
Substrate
Active site
Products
No change occurs Enzyme-substrate
at active site complex
Fig: Lock-and-key model of enzyme action
2. Induced Fit Model (Modified form of Lock and Key Model)
History: Later studies did not support lock-and-key model in all reactions. On the basis of
new evidence, an American biochemist Daniel Koshland in 1958 presented induced fit
model. According to this model, “when a substrate combines with the binding site of an
enzyme, it induces changes in enzyme structure. These changes enable the enzyme to perform
its catalytic activity more effectively.”

--- Page 4 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Postulates: This model postulates that active site is not a rigid structure and is capable of
going under modification and flexibility, before the enzyme action (catalysis) starts

Substrate
Products
Active site
Enzyme
Changes induced
in enzyme structure
Enzyme-substrate
complex
Enzyme regains its
original structure
Fig: Induced-fit model of enzyme action

Comparison of induced fit model with lock and key model
Active site: According of lock and key model active site is a rigid structure but according to
induced fit model it is flexible.
Enzyme regulation: Lock and key model is followed by non-allosteric enzymes, while
induced fit model is followed by allosteric enzymes.
Reactions: Lock and key model is usually for simple reactions (e.g., one step reactions)
while induced fit model is usually for complex reactions allowing feedback regulation.
FACTORS AFFECTING THE RATE OF ENZYME ACTION
Q5. Describe the effect of temperature on the rate of enzyme action. / Compare
the effect of temperature on enzymes of human and thermophilic bacteria.
Ans. Effect of Temperature on Enzyme Activity in Humans
The shape of a protein is determined by the
hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic
interactions that hold its polypeptide chains
in particular position. Both the hydrogen
bonds and hydrophobic interactions are easily
disrupted by slight changes in temperature.
Optimum Temperature: Every enzyme
works at its maximum rate at a specific
temperature called its optimum temperature.
e.g., The optimum temperature for human
enzymes is 37 °C.
At low Temperature: When temperature fall
below optimum temperature, the bonds that
determine enzymes shape become less
flexible. They do not permit the induced
change in active sites that is necessary for enzyme action and so reaction rate is slow.
Rate of reaction
Enzyme gains
kinetic energy
Optimum
temperature
Enzyme being
denatured
10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Temperature (°C)
Fig: Effect of temperature on enzyme
activity

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 5 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

At High Temperature: When temperature is raised up to a certain limit, the heat adds in
activation energy and so reactions are accelerated. Heat also provides kinetic energy to
substrate and enzyme molecules. It causes them to move rapidly. Thus, they collide more
frequently and reaction rate is increased.
Denaturation: When temperature is raised well above optimum temperature, the heat energy
increases the vibrations of atoms of enzyme molecules. When vibrations become too violent,
bonds cannot hold polypeptide chains in the proper position and globular structure of
enzyme is lost. This phenomenon is known as denaturation of enzyme. It results in a rapid
decrease in the rate of enzyme action and it may be blocked completely.
★Effect of Temperature on Enzyme Activity in Thermophilic Bacteria
Thermophilic bacteria live in hot springs. They have proteins with stronger bonding between
their polypeptide arms and can function at temperature of 70°C or higher. So, they are more
thermostable than human enzymes.
Q6. How pH affects the rate of enzyme action? Write the optimum pH of various
human enzymes.
Ans. Effect of pH on Enzyme Activity
All enzymes work at their maximum rate at a narrow range of pH.
Optimum pH: Every enzyme works at its best at a specific pH, called its optimum pH. For
example, pepsin is active in acidic medium (low pH) while trypsin shows its optimum
activity in alkaline medium (high pH). Some enzymes like papain from green papaya work
both in acidic and alkaline media.
Effect of changed pH: In the globular structure of an enzyme, polypeptide chains are held by
bonds between oppositely charged amino acids, such as glutamic acid (-) and lysine (+). These
bonds are sensitive to hydrogen ion concentration. Any change in pH can change the
ionization of amino acids at active site. Moreover, it may affect the ionization of substrate.
• A slight change (increase or decrease) in this pH causes retardation in enzyme activity or
blocks it completely.
• Extreme change in pH can break the bonds in enzymes, resulting in enzyme denaturation.

Table: Optimum pH of important
human enzymes
[Enzyme] [Optimum pH]
Pepsin 1.5-1.6
Salivary amylase 4.6-5.2
Sucrase 6.2
Pancreatic amylase 6.7-7.0
Catalase 7.0
Urease 7.0
Trypsin 7.8-8.7
Pancreatic lipase 8.0
Arginase 10.0

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 6 ---
Q7. Describe how the concentration of enzyme affects the rate of enzyme action?
Ans. Enzymes are very efficient in low concentrations and a small number of enzyme
molecules can catalyse reactions of large amount of substrate. The overall rate of enzyme-
controlled reactions depends directly on the
amount of enzyme present at a specific time (if
substrate concentration is unlimited).
Effect of increase in Enzyme Concentration:
When enzyme concentration increases, there are
more enzyme molecules and more active sites.
So, more substrate molecules bind with new active
sites and are transformed into products. If enzyme
concentration goes on increasing but substrate
concentration remains the same, no more
substrate molecules will be available to attach
with enzymes. So, the rate of reaction stays
constant and does not increase further.

Q8. Explain the effect of substrate concentration on the role of enzyme action?
Ans. If there are enzyme molecules with
vacant active sites, an increase in substrate
concentration will increase the rate of reaction.
At Constant Enzyme Concentration: If
enzyme concentration is kept constant and the
amount of substrate is increased, a point is
reached where any further increase in substrate
does not increase the rate of reaction anymore.
Low substrate concentration
• When enzyme molecules are free (at low
substrate concentration) new substrate
molecules bind with the available active
sites and so more products are formed in the
given time i.e., rate of enzyme action is
increased.
At High Substrate Concentration
• But when all active sites of enzymes are occupied (at high substrate concentration), any
more substrate molecules do not find free active sites and so reaction rate does not increase
and this point is called saturation.

ENZYME INHIBITION
Q9. Describe Enzymes inhibition. / Describe enzymatic inhibition, its types and its
significance.
Ans. Inhibitor: A chemical that interferes and blocks an enzyme's activity is called an
inhibitor.

--- Page 7 ---
Inhibition: In this process inhibitors attach with enzymes but are not transformed into
products and thus block active sites temporarily or permanently. This phenomenon is
known as enzyme inhibition. The final products of complex enzymatic reactions also act as
the inhibitors of the enzyme of the first step (allosteric inhibition).
Types of Inhibitors: Two general types of inhibitors are recognized competitive and non-
competitive inhibitors.
1. Competitive: A competitive inhibitor resembles structurally with the enzyme's substrate.
It competes with substrate
for the same binding site on
enzyme.
Example: The enzyme
succinic dehydrogenase
catalyses the oxidation of
succinic acid to fumaric
acid. Malonic acid has
structural similarity with
substrate (succinic acid).
So, both of them compete
for active site of enzyme.
Malonic acid is selected by active site and thus blocks it.
2. Non-competitive: A non-competitive inhibitor has no real structural similarity to substrate.
So, it does not enter
active site. Instead,
it binds enzyme at
other places. Its
binding alters the
shape of enzyme so
that active site does
not fit substrate and
so enzyme is
inhibited.
For example: Two
substrates i.e., succinic acid and CoA react to form succinyl- CoA. This reaction is catalysed
by enzyme succinyl-CoA synthetase. After its formation, the product i.e., succinyl CoA acts
as a non-competitive inhibitor and binds with enzyme. Thus, enzyme is inhibited and no more
succinyl-CoA is produced.
3. Reversible and Irreversible inhibitors
The action of any inhibitor can be irreversible or reversible, depending upon the kind of bond
formed between inhibitor and enzyme.
Irreversible inhibitors make covalent bonds with enzyme. Such inhibitors cannot be
released by dilution or dialysis or by increasing the concentration of substrate.
• For example, penicillin permanently disables the enzyme responsible for building
bacterial cell walls.
Reversible inhibitors make weak bonds (e.g., hydrogen bonds) with enzyme. Such
inhibitors can be released and the inhibition caused by them can be neutralized by increasing
the concentration of substrate.

--- Page 8 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

• For example, malonate is a reversible inhibitor of succinate. It temporarily slows down
the reaction by blocking the enzyme succinate dehydrogenase, which is involved in
cellular respiration. This inhibition can be reversed when malonate is removed.
4. Significance of Enzyme inhibition
Enzyme inhibition is crucial in various biological processes.
(i) Enzyme inhibition plays a vital role in regulating metabolic pathways. By inhibiting
specific enzymes, the rate of a metabolic reaction can be controlled.
(ii) Many drugs work as inhibitors. For example, antibiotics inhibit the enzymes of bacteria,
while cancer drugs may inhibit enzymes involved in cell division.
(iii) Enzyme inhibitors are used to manage various medical conditions. For example, some
inhibitors of enzymes involved in blood clotting are used as anticoagulants.
(iv) Some toxins and poisons inhibit important enzymes in the body. Understanding how these
inhibitors affect enzymes can be critical in treating cases of poisoning.
(v) Enzyme inhibitors serve as valuable tools in pharmaceutical research. They are used to
study the function of specific enzymes, and potential drugs. Enzyme inhibition is an important
part of studying enzyme kinetics; it helps to understand the factors that influence enzyme
activity.
Q10. Explain feedback inhibition of enzymes.
Ans. Definition: Feedback inhibition is the phenomenon where the product of a process
controls the process itself, oftentimes limiting the production of more products.
Feedback Inhibition of Enzymes: In metabolic pathways, the product of one reaction
becomes the substrate for the next reaction. At the end of pathway, a desired product is
synthesized. In order to regulate the concentration of that product, pathway needs to be shut
down. This is done through feedback inhibition. The final product of pathway acts as inhibitor.
It reacts with some initial enzyme and changes its conformation.
No more
products
Substrate
Enzyme-Inhibitor
Feedback
Enzyme 1
Intermediate
Substrate
A
Enzyme 2
Intermediate
Substrate
B
Enzyme 3
End
product
Fig: Feedback inhibition of enzyme action
That enzyme can no longer bind to its substrate. So, pathway closes and no more product is
prepared.
For example: When a cell has a greater number of ATP than its requirement, ATP itself acts
as a non-competitive inhibitor and blocks the enzyme that catalyses ATP synthesis.
CLASSIFICATION OF ENZYMES
Q11. Classify enzymes on the basis of reactions catalyzed.
Ans. According to the general type of reaction, enzymes are classified into six classes.
1. Oxidoreductases: These enzymes catalyse the oxidation / reduction of their substrates.
They add or remove H+ ions or electrons from substrates. For example, cytochrome oxidase
catalyses the oxidation of cytochrome.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 9 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM
2. Transferases: The enzymes of this class catalyse the transfer of a specific functional
group (e.g., methyl, acyl, amino or phosphate) from one substrate to another.
For example, hexokinase, transfers phosphate group from ATP to glucose.
3. Hydrolases: These enzymes catalyse hydrolysis reactions. They break their substrates into
monomers by adding water.
For example, lipase, amylase, peptidase and other digestive enzymes catalyse the hydrolysis
of food molecules.
4. Lyases: These enzymes catalyse non-hydrolytic addition to removal of groups (e.g., CO2,
NH2 etc.) from substrates.
For example, pyruvate decarboxylase removes CO2 from pyruvic acid.
5. Isomerases: These enzymes catalyse the intra-molecular rearrangement i.e., one isomer is
converted into another.
For example, hexose isomerase converts glucose to fructose.
6. Ligases: These enzymes catalyse the reactions in which two molecules join by forming
new C-C, C-N, C-O, or C-S bonds, using energy from ATP.
For example, Polymerase enzymes join monomers by using ATP, like DNA polymerase join
nucleotides.
Q12. Classify enzymes on the basis of substrates. Give examples of enzymes naming
according to substrates.
Ans. Enzymes are also classified into following groups on the basis of their substrates.
1. Proteases: This group included the enzymes which catalyse the breakdown of proteins.
• For example, pepsin and trypsin enzymes catalyse the breakdown of large polypeptides
into smaller polypeptides. Similarly, aminopeptidases further breakdown small
polypeptides into dipeptides and erypsin breaks dipeptides into amino acids.
• For example, pancreatic lipase hydrolyses lipids into fatty acids and glycerol.
3. Carbohydrases: These enzymes act upon bigger carbohydrates and break them into
smaller units.
For example:
• Amylase acts upon starch or glycogen and breaks them into maltose.
• Cellulase breaks cellulose into cellobiose (a disaccharide) or glucose.
• Maltase breaks down maltose into glucose.
• Sucrase breaks sucrose into glucose and fructose.
• Lactase breaks lactose into glucose and galactose.
4. Nucleases: These enzymes act upon nucleic acids and catalyse their breakdown. For
example, RNAase, DNAase, ATPase are responsible for the breakdown of RNA, DNA and
ATP respectively.
Q13. Classify enzymes in form of table on the basis of reactions they catalyze. Also
write their important subclasses.
Ans. Enzymes are classified into following groups on the basis of reaction they catalyze.
Class
1. Oxidoreductases
2. Transferases
Reaction type
red
ox
red
Important Subclasses
Dehydrogenases
Oxidases
Reductases
Phospho-transferases
Amino-transferases
REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 10 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

| | | Acyl-transferases |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 3. Hydrolyses | A B + 8 H2O C + D | Peptidases Lipases Glycosidases |
| 4. Lyases | A B A + B | Decarboxylases Aldolases Synthases |
| 5. Isomerases | A A | Epimerases Mutases cis trans isomerases |
| 6. Ligases | A + B + L888 ATP A B + L88 + 8 ADP | C-C ligases C-O ligases C-N ligases |

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch5 Long Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [23/36]: 11th Bio New Ch5 MCQ's.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

                                 Unit 5: Enzymes

                           Multiple Choice Questions

                      MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)

1. What roles does nicotinamide adenine 
   dinucleotide play in oxidative 
   pathways?
   (a) Enzyme              (b) Coenzyme
   (c) Prosthetic group    (d) Inhibitor
2. The enzymes that catalyse the 
   reactions in which two molecules are 
   joined together by synthesis of new 
   bonds, using energy from ATP, are 
   placed in group;
   (a) Hydrolase           (b) Ligase
   (c) Lyase               (d) Transferase
3. Which of the following is an example of 
   hydrolases?
   (a) Lipase
   (b) Glycogen phosphorylase
   (c) Pyruvate decarboxylase
   (d) Cytochrome oxidase
4. Which of the following statements 
   about enzymes is correct?
   (a) They increase the activation energy of 
       a reaction
   (b) They are consumed during the 
       reaction
   (c) They are specific in terms of the 
       reactions they catalyse
   (d) They always work optimally at high 
       temperatures.

5. Enzyme B requires Zn+2 to catalyse the 
   conversion of substrate X. The zinc is 
   best identified as a(n):
   (a) Coenzyme            (b) Activator
   (c) Substrate           (d) Product
6. If an enzyme solution is saturated with 
   substrate, the most effective way to 
   obtain an even faster yield of products 
   would be:
   (a) Add more of the enzymes
   (b) Add more substrate
   (c) Add an allosteric inhibitor
   (d) Add a non-competitive inhibitor
7. How does a non-competitive inhibitor 
   decrease the rate of an enzyme-
   catalysed reaction?
   (a) By binding the active site of the 
       enzyme
   (b) By changing the shape of the enzyme
   (c) By changing the free energy change of 
       the reaction
   (d) By acting as a coenzyme for the 
       reaction
8. Which enzyme class is responsible for 
   catalysing the addition of water to a 
   substrate molecule?
   (a) Ligase              (b) Lyase
   (c) Hydrolase           (d) Isomerase

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

SLO BASED MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
Enzyme
9. Enzymes speed up chemical reactions
by lowering:
(a) Ionization energy
(b) Activation energy
(c) Hydration energy
(d) Bond energy
10. Rate of enzyme catalyzed reactions are
________ times greater than
uncatalyzed reaction rates:
(a) 10² to 10³ (b) 10³ to 10⁸
(c) 10⁶ to 10¹¹ (d) 10⁸ to 10¹⁰
11. All enzymes are synthesized inside cells
by:
(a) Lysosomes (b) Mitochondria
(c) Ribosomes (d) Vacuoles
12. The enzymes of glycolysis are present
in:
(a) Nucleoplasm
(b) Mitochondrial matrix
(c) Stroma
(d) Cytoplasm
13. The enzymes of Calvin cycle and
Krebs's cycle
(a) Present in karyoplasm
(b) Dispersed in cytoplasm
(c) Bound to membranes of their
organelles
(d) Present in periplasmic space
14. Enzymes are ________ globular
proteins
(a) 2D (b) 3D
(c) 4D (d) both (a) & (c)
15. Small cleft or depression in the surface
of globular enzyme is:
(a) Active site
(b) Synaptic cleft
(c) T-tubule
(d) No such cleft exists
16. Substrate molecule fits into binding
site by weak chemical forces such as:
(a) Covalent bond
(b) Metallic bond
(c) Ionic bond
(d) Hydrogen bond
17. At which region of active site, substrate
is transformed into products?
(a) Binding site (b) Catalytic site
(c) Peptidyl site (d) Aminoacyl site
18. The non-protein components of enzyme
are called:
(a) Co-factor (b) Transductor
(c) Messenger (d) Both (a) & (b)
19. The kinds or types of co-factor are:
(a) One (b) Two
(c) Three (d) Four
20. The protein part of enzyme is called:
(a) Apoenzyme
(b) Co-enzyme
(c) Prothetic group
(d) Holoenzyme
21. The complete enzyme including its
coenzyme or prosthetic group is
termed as:
(a) Apoenzyme (b) Ribozyme
(c) Holoenzyme (d) Proenzyme
22. The cofactors which are attached with
enzyme by covalent bonds are called:
(a) Allosteric enzyme
(b) Apoenzyme
(c) Prosthetic group
(d) Proenzyme
23. Prosthetic groups are attached with
enzyme by:
(a) Hydrogen bond
(b) Ionic bond
(c) Hydrophobic interaction
(d) Covalent bond

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 3 ---
24. When the co-factor is a non-protein
organic molecule and is loosely
attached with enzyme, it is called:
(a) Allosteric enzyme
(b) Co-enzyme
(c) Prosthetic group
(d) Zymogen
25. Co-enzymes participate in enzyme-
catalyzed reactions, often by
transporting:
(a) Electrons
(b) Hydrogen atoms
(c) Phosphate groups
(d) Both (a) and (b)
26. The most important coenzyme in a cell
is the hydrogen acceptor.
(a) NAD+
(b) FADH2
(c) ATP
(d) Co-enzyme Q
27. When food is oxidized in cell, enzymes
draw electrons from food molecules
and transfer them to:
(a) Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide
(b) Nicotinamide Guanine Dinucleotide
(c) Nicotinamide Cytosine Dinucleotide
(d) Nicotinamide Thymine Dinucleotide
28. The speed of a chemical reaction
depends on the amount of:
(a) Activation energy (b) Substrate
(c) ATP
(d) H-ions
29. The energy which works to destabilize
existing chemical bonds is called:
(a) Deactivation energy
(b) Activation energy
(c) Ionization energy
(d) Potential energy
30. Which of the following is correct about
enzymes?
(a) Enzymes increase the activation
energy
(b) Enzyme are fibrous proteins
(c) Enzymes are synthesized by
endocrine cells
(d) The presence of enzymes does not
affect the nature or properties of end
products

31. Catalytic site is activated when:
(a) Enzyme inhibitor complex is formed
(b) Substrate attaches at allosteric site
(c) ES-complex is formed
(d) Spontaneously
32. Activation energy is lowered by:
(a) Bringing reactants together in correct
orientation
(b) Stressing particular chemical bonds of
reactants
(c) Stabilizing bonds of substrate
(d) Both (a) and (b)
33. The mechanism of enzyme can be
summarized as:
(a) E+S → ES → E+P
(b) E+P → EP → E+S
(c) E+S → E+P
(d) E+S → S+P
34. In complex metabolic pathways, end
products formed inhibit (through
feedback) the:
(a) First substrate (b) First enzyme
(c) First product (d) Last enzyme
35. Lock and key model of enzyme
mechanism was proposed by:
(a) Norman Haworth
(b) Daniel Koshland
(c) F-Sanger
(d) Emil Fisher
36. Emil Fischer proposed that,
(a) Active site is rigid
(b) Active site is flexible
(c) Active site undergo modification
(d) All of above
37. Lock and key model was proposed by
Emil Fischer in:
(a) 1890
(b) 1882
(c) 1958
(d) 1894
38. The induced fit model was modified
form of lock and key model was
proposed by:
(a) Daniel Stanford
(b) Daniel Koshland
(c) Emil Fischer
(d) Van Neil

--- Page 4 ---
39. Which of the following represent
induced fit model?
(a) When substrate combines with the
binding site, it induces change in
enzyme structure
(b) Active site is not a rigid structure
(c) It is modified form of lock-and-key
model
(d) All of above
40. Identify the model:
(a) Induced fit model
(b) Lock and key model
(c) Watson and crick model
(d) Fluid mosaic model
Factors Affecting the Enzyme Activity
41. Which of the following can affect
enzyme activity?
(a) pH
(b) Temperature
(c) Enzyme concentration
(d) All of above
42. Which of the following can be affected
by temperature in an enzyme?
(a) Hydrogen bond
(b) Hydrophobic interaction
(c) Hydrophilic interaction
(d) Both (a) and (b)
43. The temperature at which an enzyme
works at its maximum rate is called
(a) Specific temperature
(b) Maximum temperature
(c) Optimum temperature
(d) Initial temperature
44. The optimum temperature for human
enzymes is:
(a) 36.1°C
(c) 37.0°C
(b) 37.8°C
(d) 36.5°C
45. When the temperature of body falls
below 37.0°C the bonds that determine
enzymes shape becomes:
(a) Less flexible (b) More hard
(c) Less hard (d) More flexible
46. The enzymes of thermophilic bacteria
can function at:
(a) 70°C
(c) 210°C
(b) 170°C
(d) 340°C
47. The loss of globular shape of enzyme is
called:
(a) Saturation (b) Renaturation
(c) Denaturation (d) Flexion
48. A slight increase or decrease in pH of
an enzyme causes:
(a) Increase in enzyme activity
(b) Decrease in enzyme activity
(c) No effect on enzyme activity
(d) All of above
49. The pH at which an enzyme works at
maximum rate is called:
(a) Optimum pH (b) Maximum pH
(c) Average pH (d) Top pH
50. Pepsin works its best in:
(a) Acidic medium
(b) Low pH
(c) High pH
(d) Both (a) and (b)
51. The enzyme papain is present in:
(a) Yellow papaya
(b) Green papaya
(c) Red papaya
(d) Blue papaya
52. Papain works in:
(a) Acidic pH (b) Alkaline media
(c) Low pH (d) All of above
53. Pepsin's optimum pH is:
(a) 1.5 – 1.6 (b) 4.6 – 5.2
(c) 8.0 (d) 7.8 – 8.7
54. 7.0 is the optimum pH of:
(a) Catalase and urease
(b) Urease and source
(c) Pepsin and arginase
(d) Pancreatic lipase

--- Page 5 ---
55. At unlimited substrate concentration
at a specific time, rate of reaction
directly depends on:
(a) Enzyme concentration
(b) Substrate concentration
(c) Temperature
(d) pH
56. If enzyme concentration goes on
increasing, and rate of reaction stays
constant and does not increase further
means that:
(a) Substrate concentration was increased
(b) Substrate concentration was the same
(c) Less amount of enzymes is active
(d) Enzymes have no effect
57. What does the middle arrow indicate?

(a) No more substrate available
(b) No more active sites for substrates
(c) Free active sites are present
(d) Enzyme has been denatured
Enzyme Inhibition
58. A chemical that interferes and block an
enzyme's activity is called:
(a) Activator (b) Inhibitor
(c) Accelerator (d) Supressor
59. Which of the follow is a potent
inhibitor of prostaglandin?
(a) Dispirin (b) Aspirin
(c) Paracetamol (d) Tetracycline

60. Pick up the irreversible inhibitor:
(a) Cyanide
(b) Aspirin
(c) Succinate dehydrogenase
(d) Malonate
61. Which inhibitors are used as
antibiotics to kill bacteria?
(a) Irreversible (b) Non-competitive
(c) Competitive (d) Non-reversible
62. Which of the following is structurally
similar with succinic acid?
(a) Malonic acid (b) Acetic acid
(c) Mavlonic acid (d) Malic acid
63. A none competitive inhibitor binds to:
(a) The active site
(b) The substrate
(c) The site other than active site
(d) Catalytic site
64. In feedback inhibition, the final
product inhibits:
(a) The last enzyme in the metabolic
pathway
(b) The 1st enzyme in the pathway
(c) no enzyme is inhibited in pathway
(d) all enzymes are inhibited in pathway
65. The enzyme which uses ATP to join
molecules is:
(a) Isomerases (b) Ligases
(c) Hydrolases (d) Oxidoreductases
66. The mechanism of enzyme inhibition,
used to understand the factors that
influence enzyme activity is called:
(a) Enzyme kinetics
(b) Enzyme dynamics
(c) Enzyme pathology
(d) Enzyme energetics
67. Reversible inhibitors make____ bonds
with enzymes:
(a) Covalent (b) Ionic
(c) Hydrogen (d) Metallic
68. Penicillin permanently disables the
enzymes responsible for building
bacterial cell walls because it acts as:
(a) Competitive inhibitor
(b) Non-competitive inhibitor
(c) Reversible inhibitor
(d) Irreversible inhibitor

--- Page 6 ---
69. Succinic acid and CoA react to form
succinyl CoA which is catalysed by:
(a) Synthetase (b) Decarboxylase
(c) Hydroxylase (d) Reductase
70. The phenomenon where the products
of a process controls the process itself,
oftenly limiting the production of more
products is called:
(a) Feedback activation
(b) Feed forward activation
(c) Feedback inhibition
(d) Feed forward inhibition
Classification of Enzymes
71. The enzymes which remove or add H+
ions or electrons from substrate are
called:
(a) Isomerases
(b) Lyases
(c) Oxidoreductases
(d) Transferases
72. Which of the following is NOT a
hydrolase
(a) Cytochrome oxidase (b) Amylase
(c) Lipase (d) Peptidase
73. The enzymes catalyse non-hydrolytic
addition or removal of groups from
substrates are:
(a) Hydrolases (b) Transferases
(c) Lyases (d) Isomerases
74. The enzyme which catalyses the
conversion of glucose to fructose is:
(a) Pentose isomerase
(b) Hexokinase
(c) Hexoreductase
(d) Hexoisomerase

75. Which enzyme breakdown small
polypeptides into dipeptides?
(a) Erypsin (b) Aminopeptidase
(c) Pepsin (d) Trypsin
76. Which enzyme is responsible for the
breakdown of DNA?
(a) DNA polymerase
(b) DNA synthase
(c) DNA ligase
(d) DNAase
77. Choose the correct class:
A B C + B
(a) Lyases (b) Hydrases
(c) Transferases (d) Ligases
78. Pick the enzyme which is not related to
others:
(a) Dehydrogenase (b) Oxidase
(c) Reductase (d) Epimerase
79. The reaction indicates.
A B + C A + C B
(a) Oxidoreductases
(b) Transferase
(c) Hydrolyases
(d) Isomerases
80. Mark the disaccharide
(a) Cellulose (b) Chitin
(c) Cellobiose (d) Mannose

ANSWER KEY
1. b 2. b 3. a 4. c 5. b 6. a 7. b
8. c 9. b 10. b 11. c 12. d 13. c 14. b
15. a 16. d 17. b 18. a 19. c 20. a 21. c
22. c 23. d 24. b 25. d 26. a 27. a 28. a
29. b 30. d 31. c 32. d 33. a 34. b 35. d
36. a 37. d 38. b 39. d 40. a 41. d 42. d
43. c 44. c 45. a 46. a 47. c 48. b 49. a
50. d 51. b 52. d 53. a 54. a 55. a 56. b
57. b 58. b 59. b 60. a 61. c 62. a 63. c

--- Page 7 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

| 64. | b | 65. | b | 66. | a | 67. | c | 68. | d | 69. | a | 70. | c |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 71. | c | 72. | a | 73. | c | 74. | d | 75. | b | 76. | d | 77. | a |
| 78. | d | 79. | b | 80. | c |

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch5 MCQ's.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [24/36]: 11th Bio New Ch5 Short Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 5: Enzymes

Short Questions

SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS EXERCISE

Q1. Define enzyme and co-factor.
Ans. Enzymes
Enzymes are three-dimensional globular proteins, that speedup specific chemical reactions by lowering the required activation energy.
Co-factor
The additional non-protein chemical components used by enzymes, to aid in catalysis are called co-factors. For example, metal ions, prosthetic groups and coenzymes.
Q2. Differentiate between co-enzyme and prosthetic group.
Co-enzyme | Prosthetic Groups
• When the cofactor is a non-protein organic molecule and is loosely attached (hydrogen bond) with enzyme, it is called coenzyme.
• Coenzymes participate in enzyme-catalysed reactions, often by transporting electrons (hydrogen atoms), from one enzyme to another.
• Many vitamins (e.g., niacin and riboflavin) function as coenzymes.
• Some cofactors form covalent bonds with enzyme and are known as prosthetic groups.
• Prothetic group may be an organic compound e.g., hematin also known as heme, is a part of hemoglobin and myoglobin, it acts as prosthetic group in enzymes like catalyses and peroxidases.

Q3. What do you mean by hydrolases? Give two examples.
Ans. Hydrolases
These enzymes catalyse hydrolysis reactions. They break their substrates into monomers by adding water.
For example; lipase (hydrolyze lipids into fatty acids and glycerol), amylase (catalyse the hydrolysis of starch to maltose), peptidase, and other digestive enzymes catalyse the hydrolysis of food molecules.
Q4. What is meant by activation energy?
Ans. The speed of a chemical reaction depends on the amount of activation energy required to initiate it. Activation energy is the energy which works to destabilize existing chemical bonds. Enzymes bring reactants together in correct orientation or required for new bonds to form and speed up the rate of reactions.

[Graph image text]
Energy
High (Ea)
Low (Ea)
Reactants
Products
Reaction Time
Energy for activation without enzyme
Energy for activation with enzyme

Q5. Define feedback inhibition.
Ans. Feedback inhibition is the phenomenon where the product of a process controls the process itself, often-times limiting the production of more products.
For example, when a cell has a greater number of ATP than its requirement, ATP itself acts as a non-competitive inhibitor and blocks the enzyme that catalyses ATP synthesis.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
Q6. Give examples of competitive and
non-competitive inhibitors.
Ans. Competitive Inhibitors: The
enzyme succinic dehydrogenase catalyses
the oxidation of succinic acid to fumaric acid.
Malonic acid has structural similarity with
substrate (succinic acid). So, both of them
compete for active site of enzyme. Malonic
acid is selected by active site and thus blocks
it. Competitive inhibitors are used as
antibiotics to kill bacteria.
Non-Competitive Inhibitors: Two
substrates i.e. succinic acid and CoA react to
form succinyl-CoA. This reaction is
catalysed by enzyme succinyl-CoA
synthetase. After its formation, the product
i.e., succinyl CoA acts as non-competitive
inhibitors and binds with enzyme. Thus
enzyme is inhibited and no more succinyl-
CoA is produced.
Q7. What is optimum pH? Give
optimum pH of three human enzymes.

Ans. Every enzyme works its best at a
specific pH, called its optimum pH. For
example, pepsin is active in acidic medium
(low pH) while trypsin shows its optimum
activity in alkaline medium (high pH).
Optimum pH of pepsin is 1.5 – 1.6, salivary
amylase is 4.6 – 5.2 and of trypsin is 7.8 –
8.7

SLO BASED SHORT QUESTION ANSWERS

Enzymes
Q8. How do enzymes speed up specific
chemical reactions? Write the rates at
which they catalyze reactions.
Ans. Enzymes are specific proteins that
speed up specific chemical reactions by
lowering the required activation energy, but
are unaltered themselves in the process.
Enzymes are also known as biocatalysts
Rates of enzyme-catalysed reactions may be
10³ to 10⁸ times greater than the rates of
corresponding uncatalyzed reactions.
Q9. Compare the time to complete the
reaction with and without using enzymes.

Ans. A reaction that is catalysed by an
enzyme and is completed in 30 minutes,
would take one year to get completed without
being catalysed by enzyme. Thus, we can say
that without enzymes there would have been
no life at all.
Q10. Where enzymes are synthesized?
What happens after their synthesis?

Ans. All enzymes are synthesized inside
cells by ribosomes. After their synthesis,
either they stay and work inside cell or they
are secreted out to work at other sites.
• Inside cell, many enzymes are dissolved in
cytoplasm; for example, the enzymes of
glycolysis.
• Many are tightly bound to membranes of
certain organelles, for example, the
enzyme of Calvin cycle and Krebs cycle.
• Some enzymes are integral part of
ribosomes; for example, the enzymes of
protein synthesis.
Q11. Define active site. Describe its
regions.
Ans. There is a small cleft or depression on
the surface of globular enzyme molecule. It
consists of only a few amino acids. This site
is known as active site. It is the location at
which catalysis occurs.
Regions: Active site has two distinct regions
i.e., binding site and catalytic site.
• Binding site: Substrate molecule fits into
binding site by weak chemical forces, such
as hydrogen bonds.
• Catalytic site catalyses the reaction and
substrate is transformed into products.

--- Page 3 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Cofactors and Coenzymes
★Q12.How apoenzyme differs from
holoenzyme?
Ans. The protein part of enzyme is called
apoenzyme and complete enzyme including
co-factor is called haloenzyme.
Q13. How does metal ions are used as co-
factors by enzymes?
Ans. Metal ions
• Many enzymes use metal ions, such as
Ca+2, Mg+2, Mn+2, Cu+2 and Zn+2 as their
cofactors. These metal ions change the
non-functional active sites of enzymes into
functional sites.
• The attachment of a cofactor also changes
the shape of enzyme and allows it to
combine with substrate.
★Q14.Some enzymes may prove harmful.
Justify?
Ans. Some enzymes may prove harmful, if
become active at wrong place. For example;
pepsin is a protein digesting enzyme. It can
destroy protein-made structures present
inside cells where it is synthesized. That is
why it is produced in inactive form
(pepsinogen) and is secreted out of cells.
When it reaches its target site of action, it is
activated (pepsin).
★Q15.Can trace elements be used as co-
factors?
Ans. Many trace elements such as
molybdenum and manganese, which are
necessary for our health, are used by enzymes
as cofactors.
Q16. The most important co-enzyme in
cell is NAD+, comment. / Describe the role
of NAD+ as co-enzyme.
Ans. The most important coenzyme in cell
is the hydrogen acceptor nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NAD+). When NAD+
acquires a hydrogen atom from an enzyme, it
reduces to NADH. The electron of hydrogen
atom contains energy that NADH molecule
carries.
For example, when food is oxidized in cell,
enzymes draw electrons from food molecules
and transfer them to NAD+, which reduces to
NADH.
Q17. How complex metabolic pathways in
a cell are regulated by enzymes? / Describe
the behaviour of enzymes in regulating
complex reactions/metabolic pathways?

Ans. In complex metabolic pathways e.g.,
respiration, photosynthesis, protein synthesis
etc., many enzymes act in a sequence and
regulate the steps of pathway. The successive
enzymes controlling these steps are present
together along with their cofactors. The
products from one enzyme's catalysis serve
as substrate for the enzyme of next step and
are transformed into next products. The series
goes on and finally end products are formed
that inhibit (through feedback) the first
enzyme.
Mechanism of Enzyme Action
Q18. Different between lock and key model and induced fir model of enzyme action.
Lock and Key Model
• In 1894 a German chemist Emil Fischer
proposed lock-and-key model.
• According to this model, “as a specific
key can open only a specific lock, in the
same manner a specific enzyme can
transform only one specific substrate into
products”
Induced Fit Model
• American biochemist Daniel Koshland
in 1958 presented induced fit model.
• According to this model, “when a substrate
combines with the binding site of an
enzyme it induces change in enzyme
structure.
• This model postulates that active site is not
a rigid structure and is capable of going

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 4 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

• This model postulates that active site is a
rigid structure and there is no
modification or flexibility in it before,
during or after the enzyme action.

under modification and flexibility, before
the enzyme action (catalysis) starts.

Factors Affecting the Rate of Enzyme
Action
Q19. Define optimum temperature.
What happens when the temperature falls
below the optimum temperature?
Ans. Optimum Temperature: Every
enzyme works at its maximum rate at a
specific temperature called its optimum
temperature. The optimum temperature for
human enzymes is 37°C.
At Low Temperature: When temperature
fall below optimum temperature, the bonds
that determine enzymes shape become less
flexible. They do not permit the induced
change in active sites that is necessary for
enzyme action and so reaction rate is slow.
Q20. If the temperature is raised above
optimum temperature, what are its
consequences?
Ans. When temperature is raised well
above optimum temperature, the heat energy
increases the vibrations of atoms of enzyme
molecules. When vibrations become too
violent, bonds cannot hold polypeptide
chains in the proper position and globular
structure of enzyme is lost. This phenomenon
is known as denaturation of enzyme. It
results in a rapid decrease in the rate of
enzyme action and it may be blocked
completely.
Q21. Draw a graph showing the effect of
pH on pepsin, salivary amylase and
pancreatic lipase.
Rate of reaction
Pepsin
Salivary
amylase
Pancreatic
lipase
pH
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Q22. How does reaction rate proceeds on
adding more enzymes at unlimited and
limited substrate concentration?
Ans. The overall rate of enzyme-controlled
reactions depends directly on the amount of
enzyme present at a specific time (if substrate
concentration is unlimited). When enzyme
concentration increases, there are more
enzyme molecules and more active sites. So,
more substrate molecules bind with new
active sites and are transformed into
products. If enzyme concentration goes on
increasing but substrate concentration
remains the same, no more substrate
molecules will be remaining to attach with
enzymes. So, the rate of reaction stays
constant and does not increase further.
Q23. What is the effect of substrate
concentration on reaction rate?
Ans. If there are enzyme molecules with
vacant active sites, an increase in substrate
concentration will increase the rate of
reaction. If enzyme concentration is kept
constant and the amount of substrate is
increased, a point is reached where any
further increase in substrate does not increase
the rate of reaction any more.
Enzyme Inhibition
Q24. Differentiate between inhibitor and
inhibition?
Inhibitor
Inhibition
A chemical that Inhibitors attach with
interferes and enzymes but are not
blocks active site, transformed into
hence blocking an products and thus
enzyme's activity block active sites
is called an temporarily or
inhibitor. permanently. This
phenomenon is
known as enzyme
inhibition.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 5 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

★Q24. How does cyanide acts as irreversible inhibitor?
Ans. The poison cyanide is an irreversible enzyme inhibitor that combines with copper and iron in the active site of enzyme cytochrome oxidase and blocks cellular respiration.
Q25. Differentiate between reversible and irreversible inhibitors?
| Reversible | Irreversible |
| :--- | :--- |
| • Reversible inhibitors make weak bonds i.e. hydrogen bonds with enzyme. | • Irreversible inhibitors make covalent bonds with enzyme. |
| • Such inhibitors can be released and the inhibition caused by them can be neutralized by increasing the concentration of substrate. | • Such inhibitors cannot be released by dilution or dialysis or by increasing the concentration of substrate. |
| • For example, malonate is a reversible inhibitor. It temporarily slows down the reaction by blocking the enzyme succinate dehydrogenase, which is involved in cellular respiration. This inhibition can be reversed when malonate is removed. | • For example, penicillin permanently disables the enzyme responsible for building bacterial cell walls. |

Q26. Describe three significances of enzyme inhibition?
Ans. Significance of Enzyme inhibition
1. Many drugs work as inhibitors. For example, antibiotics inhibit the enzymes of bacteria, while cancer drugs may inhibit enzymes involved in cell division.
2. Enzyme inhibitors are used to manage various medical conditions. For example, some inhibitors of enzymes involved in blood clotting are used as anticoagulants.
3. Some toxins and poisons inhibit important enzymes in the body. Understanding how these inhibitors affect enzymes can be critical in treating cases of poisoning.
Classification of Enzymes
Q27. Name the classes of enzyme on the basis of reactions?
Ans. The classes of enzymes on the basis of reactions:
1 Oxidoreductases 2. Transferases 3. Hydrolases 4. Lyases 5. Isomerases 6. Ligases
Q28. Compare oxidoreductases with transferases.
| Oxidoreductases | Transferases |
| :--- | :--- |
| • These enzymes catalyse the oxidation / reduction of their substrates. They add or remove H+ ions or electrons from substrates. | • The enzymes of this class catalyse the transfer of a specific functional group (e.g., methyl, acyl, amino, or phosphate) from one substrate to another. |
| • For example, cytochrome oxidase catalyses the oxidation of cytochrome. | • For example, hexokinase transfers phosphate group from ATP to glucose. |

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 6 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q29. Differentiate between hydrolases
and isomerases?
| Hydrolases | Isomerases |
| :--- | :--- |
| • These enzymes catalyse hydrolysis reactions. They break their substrates into monomers by adding water. | • These enzymes catalyse the intra-molecular rearrangement i.e., one isomer is converted into another. |
| • For example; lipase, amylase, peptidase, and other digestive enzymes catalyse the hydrolysis of food molecules. | • For example, hexose isomerase converts glucose to fructose. |

Q30. How lyases differ from ligases?
| Lyases | Ligases |
| :--- | :--- |
| • These enzymes catalyse non-hydrolytic addition or removal of groups (e.g., CO2, NH2 etc.) from substrates. | • These enzymes catalyse the reactions in which two molecules join by forming new C-C, C-N, C-O, or C-S bonds, using energy from ATP. |
| • For example, pyruvate decarboxylase removes CO2 from pyruvic acid. | • For example, polymerase enzymes (DNA polymerase, RNA polymerase) join monomers by using ATP. |

Q31. Name the enzyme of the reaction.
Write its sub-classes?
(A)+(B)+L888 ⇌ (A)(B)+L88+8
ATP ADP
Ans. Enzyme: Ligases
Subclasses
(i) C-C ligases (ii) C-O ligases
(iii) C-N ligases
Q32. How nucleases differ from lipases?
| Lipases | Nucleases |
| :--- | :--- |
| • These enzymes act upon lipids and catalyse their breakdown. | • These enzymes act upon nucleic acids and catalyse their breakdown. |
| • For example, pancreatic lipase hydrolyses lipids into fatty acids and glycerol. | • For example, RNAase, DNAase ATPase are responsible for the breakdown of RNA, DNA and ATP respectively. |

Q33. What are Carbohydrases? Give
examples.
Ans. Carbohydrases: These enzymes act
upon bigger carbohydrates and break them
into smaller units.
For example
• Amylase acts upon starch or glycogen and
breaks them into maltose.
• Cellulase breaks cellulose into cellobiose
(a disaccharide) or glucose.
• Maltase breaks down maltose into glucose.
• Sucrase breaks sucrose into glucose and
fructose.
• Lactase breaks lactose into glucose and
galactose.
(A)(B)+8 ⇌ 8+8 Peptidases
H2O Lipases
Glycodsidases
Q34. Illustrate the role of proteases in
metabolism with examples?
Ans. Proteases: This group included the
enzymes which catalyse the breakdown of
proteins.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 7 ---
For example, pepsin and trypsin enzymes
catalyse the breakdown of large polypeptides
into smaller polypeptides.
• Aminopeptidases further breakdown
small polypeptides into dipeptides.
• Erypsin breaks dipeptides into amino
acids.
Q35. Give sub-classes of oxidoreductases
and transferases?
Enzymes Sub-Classes
Oxidoreductases
Dehydrogenases
Oxidases
Reductases
Transferases
Phospho-transferases
Amino-transferases
Acyl-transferases

Q36. Write down the sub-classes of
hydrases and lyases?
Enzymes Sub-Classes
Hydrolases
Peptidases
Lipases
Glycosidases
Lyases
Decarboxylases
Aldolases
Synthases
Q37. Identify the enzyme and writes its
sub-classes?
A A
Enzyme Reaction Type Sub-
Classes
Isomerases A A Epimerases
Mutases
Cis trans
isomerases

LONG QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)
Q1. Describe the structure of enzyme,
explaining the role and component parts of
the active site of an enzyme.
Ans. See Q1. of theory.
Q2. Differentiate among the three types
of co-factors, by giving examples.
Ans. See Q2. of theory.
Q3. Explain the mechanism of enzyme
action through induced Fit Model,
comparing it with Lock and Key Model.
Ans. See Q4. of theory.
Q4. Define activation energy and
explain through graph how an enzyme
speeds up a reaction by lowering
activation energy.
Ans. See Q3. of theory.
Q5. Describe the effect of temperature
on the rate of enzyme action.
Ans. See Q5. of theory.
Q6. Compare the optimum
temperatures of enzymes of human and
thermophilic bacteria.
Ans. See Q5. of theory
Q7. Describe how the concentration of
enzyme affects the rate of enzyme action.
Ans. See Q7 of theory.
Q8. Explain the effect of substrate
concentration on the rate of enzyme
action.
Ans. See Q8. of theory.
Q9. Describe enzymatic inhibition, its
types and its significance.
Ans. See Q9. of theory.
Q10. Categorize inhibitors into
competitive and non-competitive
inhibitors.
Ans. See Q9. of theory.
Q11. Explain feedback inhibition.
Ans. See Q10. of theory.
Q12. Classify enzymes on the basis of the
reactions catalysed.
Ans. See Q11 of theory.
Q13. Give examples of enzymes' naming
according to substrates.
Ans. See Q12. of theory.

--- Page 8 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

INQUISITIVE QUESTIONS
Q1. Does physical exercise involve anabolic processes, catabolic processes, or both?
Give evidence for your answer.
Ans. Yes, physical exercise involves both anabolic and catabolic processes.
Evidence for Catabolism
During exercise, energy is required for muscle contraction, our cells breakdown glucose
aerobically to form ATP. Doing exercise is the evidence that we are continuously being
provided with energy, which is brought by catabolism of glucose.
Evidence for anabolism
In doing physical exercise daily, we gain muscle mass, which is an anabolic process providing
the evidence of muscle repair and growth.
Q2. If a chemical reaction could occur without an enzyme, why is it important to have
one?
Ans. A reaction that is catalysed by an enzyme and is completed in 30 minutes, would take
one year to get completed without being catalysed by enzyme. Thus, we can say that without
enzymes there would have been no life at all.
Q3. Construct and interpret graphs based on data about the effect of temperature,
enzyme concentration and substrate concentration on the rate of enzyme action.
                                     Optimum
                                     temperature
                    Enzyme gains
                    kinetic energy
                                     Enzyme being
                                     denatured
Rate of reaction
                                     10   20   30   40   50   60   70
                                     Temperature (°C)
                                     Effect of temperature
No more substrate to attach
with enzyme
                                     No more active sites
                                     for substrate
Rate of reaction
                                     Rate of reaction
Enzyme concentration
                                     Substrate concentration
Effect of enzyme concentration       Effect of substrate concentration
Q4. Identify the competitive and non-competitive inhibitors from a list of chemical
used in daily life.
          Competitive Inhibitors                 Non-Competitive Inhibitors
• Malonic Acid                         • Aspirin
• Sulfa drug                           • Cyanide
• Anti-biotics                         • Succinyl CoA

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch5 Short Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [25/36]: 11th Bio New Ch6 Long Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 6: Bioenergetics

Long Questions

DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONS

Q1. Define Bioenergetics. How ATP is used as cell energy currency?
Ans. Definition: Bioenergetics is the study of how energy flows through living systems.
Explanation: It explores the processes through which cells store and expend energy. The
processes of photosynthesis and respiration help to understand some of the principles of
bioenergetics. Photosynthesis acts as an energy-capturing while respiration as an energy-
releasing process.
ATP
★Discovery of ATP: ATP was discovered
in 1929 by Karl Lohmann. In 1941, the
Nobel prize winner Fritz Lipmann
proposed that ATP is the main energy-
transfer molecule in the cell.
The energy currency of cells
Cells use a special energy currency for their
reactions. This currency is actually a
nucleotide called adenosine triphosphate
(ATP). When cells store energy, they make
ATP. When cells need energy, they break
ATP. A molecule of ATP has three
subunits i.e. adenine, (a nitrogen
containing base); ribose (a five-carbon
sugar) and three phosphate groups.
ATP-ADP Cycle
The covalent bonds between two phosphates are
high-energy bonds. When one of these bonds is
broken, inorganic phosphate (Pi) separates and
energy is released. The breaking of one phosphate
bond releases about 7.3 kcal (7,300 calories) per
mole of ATP.
ATP + H2O → ADP + Pi + energy (7.3 kcal/mole)

★ Note: All questions and paragraphs marked with a star ★ are explanations of the Box
Information provided in the textbook.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
In common energy reactions only the outer P-P high energy bond breaks. When this happens,
ATP becomes ADP (adenosine diphosphate) and one Pi is released.
In some cases, ADP is further broken down to AMP (adenosine monophosphate) and Pi:
ADP + H2O → AMP + Pi + energy (7.3 kcal/mole)
Cells get energy from the oxidation of food. They store this energy by combining ADP with
Pi to form ATP. So, we can summarize that ATP is made during energy-releasing processes
and it is broken down during energy-consuming processes. In this way ATP transfers energy
between metabolic reactions.

PHOTOSYNTHESIS

Q2. Define photosynthesis. What is role of light and carbon dioxide in process
of photosynthesis?
Ans. Photosynthesis
Definition: Photosynthesis involves the use of light energy that is absorbed and converted
into chemical energy by photosynthetic pigments.
★In this process the energy-poor inorganic compounds of carbon (i.e. CO2) are reduced to
energy-rich carbohydrates.
Equation: Photosynthesis in plants can be summarized as:
6 CO2 + 12 H2O + Light → C6H12O6 + 6 O2 + 6 H2O
Explanation: Carbon dioxide, water and light are the reactants while glucose and oxygen are
the products. Water appears on both sides of the equation because water is used as reactant in
some reactions and released as product in others. However, there is no yield of water.
★Compensation Point: Photosynthesis uses the products of respiration and respiration
uses the products of photosynthesis. Photosynthesis occurs only during day time but
respiration goes on day and night.
In Dark: During darkness, leaves and other parts respire and utilize oxygen and release carbon
dioxide.
Dawn and dusk: At dawn and dusk, when light intensity is low, the rate of photosynthesis
and respiration may be equal for a short time. Thus, the oxygen released from photosynthesis
is just equal to the amount required for cellular respiration. Also, the carbon dioxide released
by respiration is just equal to the amount required by photosynthesizing cells. At this moment
there is no net gas exchange between leaves and atmosphere. This is termed as compensation
point.
At noon, when the light intensity increases, the rate of photosynthesis also increases. At this
time, there is more requirement of carbon dioxide. Respiration alone cannot supply this carbon
dioxide. Similarly, the oxygen produced during photosynthesis is more than the need of the
respiring cells. So, the result is the net release of oxygen coupled with the uptake of carbon
dioxide.
Role of Light: Light plays a crucial role in photosynthesis, providing the energy required to
drive the chemical reactions that transform simple molecules into complex organic
compounds. Light energy is absorbed by chlorophyll. The absorbed light energy is converted
into chemical energy, which is in turn stored in organic compounds in the form of C-H bond
energy.
Role of Carbon Dioxide
Sugar is formed by the reduction of CO2 by using ATP and NADPH. In this way, CO2 acts
as the source of carbon for making sugars. Carbon dioxide enters the leaves through stomata
and gets dissolved in water absorbed by the cell walls of mesophyll cells. Stomata are found

--- Page 3 ---
in large numbers in leaves. The entry of CO2 into the leaves is dependent upon the opening of
stomata.
★Source of CO2: About 10% of total photosynthesis is carried out by terrestrial plants, the
rest occurs in oceans, lakes and ponds. Aquatic photosynthetic organisms use dissolved CO2,
bicarbonates and soluble carbonates as carbon source. Land photosynthetic organisms use
atmospheric CO2 as carbon source.
Q3. Describe the role of water in photosynthesis through an experiment.
Ans. Role of Water
Water is the source of hydrogen, for the reduction of CO2 during photosynthesis. Oxygen
released during photosynthesis comes from water and so water is an important source of
atmospheric oxygen which most organisms need for aerobic respiration and thus for obtaining
energy to live.
Contribution of Van Neil: In 1930s, Van Neil hypothesized that plant splits water as a source
of hydrogen, releasing oxygen as a by-
product. Neil’s hypothesis was based on the
investigations on photosynthetic bacteria
that make carbohydrate from carbon
dioxide, but do not release oxygen later
confirmed by scientists during 1940s.
• An experiment was conducted in which
isotopic tracer (18O) of oxygen was
used. In laboratory, scientists prepared
water with heavy-oxygen i.e., H218O.
• They also prepared carbon dioxide with
heavy oxygen i.e., C18O2.
• Experimental green plants in one group
were give water H218O and normal
carbon dioxide i.e., C16O2.
• Plants in the second group were given
C18O2 and normal water i.e., H216O.
Both plants were given an environment
to conduct photosynthesis.
• Oxygen released during photosynthesis
of both plants was collected and tested.
• It was found that plants of first group
produced 18O but the plants of second group produced normal oxygen (16O).
Q4. What are photosynthetic pigments? Explain chlorophyll molecule and
accessory pigments as photosynthetic pigments?
Ans. Photosynthetic pigment
Photosynthetic pigments are present in thylakoid membranes. These pigments capture light
energy necessary for photosynthesis. Some of the pigments are chlorophyll a, chlorophyll b,
xanthophylls, carotenes.
Role of photosynthetic pigments: Different pigments absorb light of different wavelengths
(colours). Light behave like a stream of particles called photons. Pigment molecules absorb
one photon at a time. When a pigment molecule absorbs a photon, it electrons move to higher
energy level, so, it becomes energy-rich or excited.

--- Page 4 ---
★ Wavelength of photon: Short wavelength photons (blue) have a higher energy than long
wavelength (red) photons. More energetic photons (shorter wavelength) promote electrons to
higher energy levels.
Bacteriochlorophylls
Chlorophyll is a lipid molecule. Chlorophylls are of different kinds. Chlorophyll a,b,c and d
are found in plants and algae, while the others are found in photosynthetic bacteria and are
known as bacteriochlorophylls.
Parts: A molecule of chlorophyll consists of two parts i.e., a hydrophilic head and a
hydrophobic tail.
Head: The head is made of porphyrin ring, which further consists of four pyrrole rings (5-
sided N-containing compounds). The four pyrrole rings are held together by a magnesium
atom in the centre. In chlorophyll-a, the second pyrrole ring has methyl (CH3) group while
in chlorophyll-b, it has aldehyde (CHO) group at the same spot. The porphyrin ring of
chlorophyll absorbs light.
Tail: The tail is made of long hydrocarbon
chain. It anchors the molecule in the
thylakoid membrane.
Light Absorption: Chlorophyll absorb
mainly violet-blue and orange-red
wavelengths of light. Green wavelengths are
least absorbed by chlorophyll and are
transmitted or reflected.
Accessory Pigments
Accessory pigments include all the
pigments, other than chlorophyll-a, which
can gather light for photosynthesis.
Chlorophyll-b is an accessory pigment and
others are carotenoids (carotenes and
xanthophylls) and phycobilins.
Occurrence: Chlorophyll b and carotenoids
are found in plants while phycobilins are
found in the red algae and cyanobacteria.
Absorption of light: When accessory
pigments absorb light, they pass on the
energy towards chlorophyll a. It is generally
believed that the order of transfer of energy
in plants is;
Carotenoids → Chlorophyll b → Chlorophyll a
Q5. Describe the action and absorption spectrum of light.
Ans. Action spectrum: Photosynthetic pigments absorb different wavelengths of light at
different rates. Moreover, the different wavelengths are also differently effective in
photosynthesis. The effectiveness of different wavelengths of light is determined in terms of
action spectrum. For getting action spectrum of light, a plant is illuminated with different
colours of light one by one. While providing each colour, the rate of photosynthesis is
measured by measuring the amount of oxygen emitted from leaves. The data is plotted in a

--- Page 5 ---
graph called action spectrum. The first action spectrum was made by a German biologist. T W
Engelmann in 1883. He worked on the photosynthetic pigments of Spirogyra. When the cells
of a filament of Spirogyra were illuminated with different wavelengths of light, maximum
photosynthesis occurred in the cells which received blue and red spectrum of light and so
maximum oxygen was emitted from these cells.
Absorption Spectrum: A graph showing different wavelengths absorbed by a pigment, is
called absorption spectrum of the pigment. Absorption spectrum of chlorophylls indicates that
absorption of blue light (430 nm) and red light (670 nm) is maximum. Absorption peaks of
carotenoids are different from those of chlorophylls. Action spectrum of photosynthesis also
shows that blue and red parts lights are the most effective. This means that the action spectrum
of photosynthesis coincides with the absorption spectrum of photosynthetic pigments.
Some wavelengths not absorbed by chlorophyll-a are very effectively absorbed by
chlorophyll-b and vice-versa.
Such differences increase the
range of light absorbed by
both chlorophylls.

| Features | Chlorophyll-a | Chlorophyll-b |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Absorbance | 430 nm | 455 nm |
| Colour | Blue Green | Yellow - Green |
| Role in photosynthesis | Primary pigment | Accessory pigment |

Fig: (a) Absorption spectrum; (b) Action spectrum

Q6. What are photosystems? Give their
structure. / Describe how photosynthetic
pigments are organized in thylakoid membrane?

Ans. Definition: For efficient absorption and
utilization of solar energy, photosynthetic pigments are
organized into clusters, called photosystems. These
photosystems are embedded in thylakoid membranes
of chloroplasts.
Components: Photosystems contain photosynthetic
pigments and the carriers of electron transport chain.
Each photosystem consists of a light gathering ‘antenna complex’ and a ‘reaction centre’.

--- Page 6 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Antenna Complex: Antenna complex has many
pigment molecules which capture light energy
and pass the excitation energy (in the form of high-
energy electrons) to the reaction centre.
Reaction Centre: The reaction centre has one or
more molecules of chlorophyll-a, which pass the
high-energy electrons to a primary electron
acceptor. The electron acceptor passes them on to
the series of electron carriers, collectively called
electron transport chain.
Types: In chloroplast, there are two photosystems,
photosystem-I, (PS-I) and photosystem-II (PS-
II). These are named so in order of their discovery.
PS-I: PS-I has P700 chlorophyll-a molecule in its
reaction centre and it absorbs maximum light of
700 nm.
PS-II: The reaction centre of PS-II has P680
chlorophyll-a, which absorbs best the light of 680 nm.
Q7. How photosynthesis is a redox reaction? Explain.
Ans. Mechanism of photosynthesis
Photosynthesis is a redox (oxidation-reduction) process. As indicated in the photosynthesis
equation below, when water molecules are split apart, they are actually oxidized (they lose
electrons and hydrogen ions) and yield oxygen. Meanwhile, CO2 is reduced to sugar as
electrons and hydrogen ions are added to it. In this way oxidation and reduction go hand in
hand.
                                     Reduction
      6CO2 + 12H2O + light ---------------------> C6H12O6 + 6O2 + 6H2O
                                     Oxidation

However, it is not a simple, single - step process.
Rather, it is a complex metabolic pathway
consisting of a series of reactions. The light-
dependent reactions take place on the thylakoid
membranes of the grana while the light-
independent reactions take place in the stroma of
the chloroplasts.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 7 ---
Q8. Give detail of the events that capture light and convert it into chemical
energy during light dependent reactions? Illustrate Cyclic Photophosphorylation.

Ans. Light Dependent Reactions
The key events in the light-dependent reactions of photosynthesis are (1) the absorption of
light energy by photosynthetic pigments, (2) the excitation of electrons by that energy, and
(3) the formation of ATP and NADPH.
Photophosphorylation: The formation of ATP is the most important step of light-dependent
reactions. It is called photophosphorylation. This process is either non-cyclic
photophosphorylation or cyclic photophosphorylation.
Non-Cyclic Photophosphorylation: It is the usual way of the production of ATPs during
light-dependent reactions. In non-cyclic pathway, both photosystems i.e., PS-I and PS-II
participate and two electron chains are involved. It happens in the following way.
1. Absorption of light by PS-II: When light falls on PS-II, the energy level of chlorophyll
molecules of its antenna centre rises. Two excited electrons move from them and pass to
different chlorophyll molecules. The excited electrons reach P680 chlorophyll present in
the reaction centre. Due to energy boost of P680 chlorophyll, is two excited electrons pass
to the primary electron acceptor of photosystem-II. Due to it, an electron "hole" is created
in P680 chlorophyll, which has become a strong oxidizing agent.
2. Photolysis of water: The electron "hole" in chlorophyll molecule is filled by the electrons
from water. When water molecule reacts with oxidized chlorophyll in PS-II, it breaks into
two hydrogen ions, an oxygen atom (which immediately combines with another oxygen
to form O2), and two electrons. These two electrons fill the "hole" in P680 chlorophyll.
This water splitting step of photosynthesis is called photolysis. The oxygen produced
during photolysis is the main source of atmospheric oxygen.
3. Electron flow from PS-II to PS-I: In step 1, the photoexcited electrons of P680
chlorophyll were received by primary electron acceptor of PS-II. Now, these electrons
carriers called plastoquinone (PQ), cytochrome complex and plastocyanin (PC). As
electrons move down the chain, their energy goes on decreasing and is used by thylakoid
membrane to produce ATP through the process of chemiosmosis.
4. Absorption of light by PS-I: In the next step light energy is absorbed by PS-I. The energy
level of its chlorophyll molecules boosts to very high level. The excited electrons of P700
chlorophyll of the reaction centre pass to the primary electron acceptor of PS-I. The
electrons coming from PS-II fill the electron "hole" of P700 chlorophyll of PS-I.
5. Electron flow from PS-I to NADP+: The primary electron acceptor of PS-I passes the
photoexcited electrons to a second electron transport chain. These electrons are received
by ferredoxin (FD). An enzyme NADP reductase transfers these electrons from FD to
NADP+. When NADP+ gets two electrons and an H+ ion, it is reduced to NADPH. This
reaction stores the high-energy electrons in NADPH.

--- Page 8 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Primary
electron acceptor
Primary
electron acceptor 2e-
2e-
PQ 2e-
2H+
Cytochrome
complex 2e-
H2O
2e-
PC 2e-
FD
H+ 2e-
NADPH NADP+
Photons
Photons
P680
Energy for
synthesis of
ATP
by chemiosmosis
P700
PHOTOSYSTEM 1
Fig: Light-dependent reactions (noncyclic photophosphorylation)

So, the light energy gets converted
into chemical energy (ATP and
NADPH). The zigzag path taken by
electrons through PS-II and PS-II and
electron transport chains, is called Z-
scheme.
Cyclic Photophosphorylation
Under certain conditions,
photoexcited electrons of PS-I take an
alternative path called cyclic electron
flow. This path uses PS-I but not PS-
II. These electrons cycle-back from
primary electron acceptor of PS-I to
P700 chlorophyll via the electron
transport chain. There is no
production of NADPH and no release
of oxygen. Cyclic flow however
generates ATP. It happens when
2e-
PQ 2e-
Primary
electron acceptor
2e-
Cytochrome
complex 2e-
PC 2e-
Energy for
synthesis of
ATP
by chemiosmosis
P700
Photons
PHOTOSYSTEM 1
Fig: Cyclic Photophosphorylation
Calvin cycle slows down and NADPH accumulates in chloroplast.
Q9. Explain the mechanism of Chemiosmosis with the help of diagram.

Ans. Chemiosmosis
This process use the energy released from electron to synthesize ATP. During light-dependent
reaction when electrons are transferred to the series of carriers of electron transport chain, it
results in oxidation and reduction reactions. Electrons lose energy during this carrier-to-carrier

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 9 ---
transport. Chemiosmosis is the mechanism in which thylakoid membranes couple these
redox reactions with the synthesis of ATPs.
Process
• The energy released from electrons is spent for the active transport of H+ ions from the
stroma of chloroplast to its inner compartment (lumen).
• In this way many H+ ions are deposited in the lumen. This H+ ion gradient in lumen has
potential energy.
• The H+ ions diffuse back
from lumen in stroma (from
higher concentration in
lumen to lower
concentration).
• While diffusing, they pass
through a special protein of
the membrane of thylakoid
cells. This protein is an
enzyme called ATP
synthase.
• This enzyme uses the energy
yielded from the flow of H+
ions to make a bond between
ADP and inorganic
phosphate (Pi).
• So, ADP is converted into
ATP and energy is packed
in it.
★ The electron transport chains
in mitochondria and chloroplasts generate. ATP by the same mechanism of chemiosmosis.
Q10. Explain Calvin cycle? / Illustrate light independent reactions of
photosynthesis in terms of paragraph and illustrate in terms of Calvin cycle.

Ans. Light – Independent Reactions
Light-independent reactions are a series of reactions which happen in the stroma of
chloroplast. These reactions use carbon from CO2, energy from ATP, and hydrogen ions from
NADPH to construct energy-rich sugar molecules. These are also called dark reactions.
These reactions can occur in the absence as well as in the presence of light, as long as ATP
and NADPH are available.
Discovery: The details of dark reactions were discovered by Melvin Calvin and his
colleagues at the University of California. That is why, the dark reactions are also called the
Calvin cycle. Calvin was awarded Nobel Prize in 1961 for this work.
Phases: The Calvin cycle is divided into the following phases.
Phase I: Carbon Fixation
Carbon fixation refers to the initial incorporation of CO2 into organic material. An enzyme
known as ribulose biphosphate carboxylase (or Rubisco; probably the most abundant

--- Page 10 ---
protein on Earth) combines three molecules of CO2 with three molecules of a five-carbon
sugar named ribulose biphosphate (RuBP). It results in the formation of six molecules of a
three-carbon compound called 3-phophoglyceric acid (3-PGA) or 3-phophoglycerate.

Rubisco
3
CO2
3
Ribulose biphosphate (RuBP)
6
3-Phosphoglyceric acid (3-PGA)
Phase I
Carbon Fixation
6 ATP
6 ADP
3 ADP
3 ATP
2 P
5
G3P
1
Glucose
and other
compounds
G3P
Phase III
RuBP
Regeneration of
Phase II
Reduction
6
1-3-Biphosphoglyceric acid
6 NADPH
6 P
6 NADP+
6
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate (G3P)
Fig: The Calvin cycle

Phase II: Reduction
In this phase, six phosphate groups are taken from six ATPs and added to molecules of 3-
PGA. In this way, each 3-PGA changes into 1, 3-biphosphoglyceric acid. Each 1,3-
biphosphoglyceric acid is then reduced to Glyceraldehyde 3-phophate (G3P). NADPH
provides hydrogen for this reduction. During this step, phosphate groups are also detached
from 1,3-biphosphoglyceric acid.
In this way, six molecules of G3P are produced, out of which one molecule leaves the cycle.
It combines with another G3P and makes glucose, which may be then converted to other
carbohydrates.
★G3P in Glycolysis: G3P is the same three-carbon sugar which is formed in glycolysis (first
phase of cellular respiration) by the splitting of glucose.
Phase III: Regeneration of RuBp
Through a series of reactions, five molecules of G3P are converted into three molecules of
Ribulose phosphate (RuP). One phosphate group is added to each RuP to make three
molecules of RuBP by using three ATPs of light reactions. These RuBP receive CO2 again
and the cycle continues.
Q11. What is cellular respiration? Give its types.
Ans. Definition: Cellular respiration is the universal process by which organisms break
down complex carbon containing compounds (e.g., glucose) to get useable energy.

--- Page 11 ---
Equation: Cellular respiration can be summarized as:
C6H12O6 + 6O2 → 6CO2 + 6H2O + Energy
The arrangement of atoms in glucose has more stored energy while there is much less energy
in the arrangement of atoms in CO2 and H2O. The reason is that there are many C-H bonds in
glucose but there are no such bonds in CO2 and H2O.
The exchange of CO2 and O2 between the organism and its environment is called external
respiration or breathing.
Step-by-step oxidation: Cellular respiration is the process by which energy is made available
to cells in a step-by-step oxidation of food in the cells.
★Many of the reactions that occur in your cells also occur in the cells of frog mice, planaria,
mushrooms and radishes.
Respiratory Fuel: The basic events in cellular respiration in all cells are much similar. Almost
all cells in all organisms use glucose as energy source. That is why, glucose is known as
respiratory fuel.
Types: There are two main types of cellular respiration:
1. Anaerobic respiration (fermentation) takes place in the absence of oxygen.
2. Aerobic respiration takes place in the presence of oxygen.
In the first step of both these types, glucose is split into two molecules of pyruvic acid
(C3H4O3) in a process called glycolysis. The next reactions of pyruvic acid are different in
anaerobic and aerobic respiration.
Q12. What happens with glucose in anaerobic respiration and how different
organisms modify the end products?
Ans. Anaerobic Respiration: Anaerobic respiration happens in many microorganisms
and in some cells of higher plants. It also happens in the muscle cells of vertebrates. In
anaerobic respiration, glucose is not completely oxidized. This type of respiration yields
relatively small amount of energy from glucose molecule. As a result of anaerobic respiration,
one glucose molecule yields only two ATPs (only about 2% of the energy present in glucose).
The energy in two ATPs is equivalent to 14.6 kcal.
Types of Fermentation
Anaerobic respiration consists of glycolysis followed by the reduction of pyruvic acid by
NADH to either lactic acid or alcohol and CO2 i.e., it may again be classified as;
a. Alcoholic Fermentation: In primitive prokaryotic cells (bacteria) and in some
eukaryotic cells such as yeast, pyruvic acid is further broken down by alcoholic
fermentation into alcohol (C2H5OH) and CO2.
2(C3H4O3) → 2(C2H5OH) + 2CO2
Pyruvic acid Ethyl alcohol
b. Lactic acid Fermentation: In lactic acid fermentation, each pyruvic acid molecule is
converted into lactic acid C3H6O3 in the absence of oxygen gas.
2(C3H4O3) 4H → 2(C3H6O3)
Pyruvic acid Lactic acid

--- Page 12 ---
This form of anaerobic respiration occurs in muscle cells of humans and other animals. It
happens during extreme physical activities, when oxygen cannot be transported to the cells as
rapidly as it is needed. Many bacteria also use lactic acid fermentation to get energy.

2 ADP
+2 P 2 ATP
Glycolysis + 2 CO2
Alcoholic Fermentation +
2 NAD+ 2 NADH 2 Pyruvic 2 NADH 2 NAD+ 2 Ethanol
acid + 2 H+
Glucose

2 ADP
+2 P 2 ATP
Glycolysis + Lactic acid Fermentation +
2 NAD+ 2 NADH 2 Pyruvic 2 NADH 2 NAD+ 2 Lactic
acid + 2 H+ acid
Glucose

Fig: Alcoholic fermentation and lactic acid fermentation

Q13. What do you know about evolution of aerobic respiration? Also write its
mechanism.
Ans. ★Evolution of Aerobic Respiration
When life evolved on planet Earth free O2 was not available. So, only anaerobic respiration
was possible. But with the evolution of photosynthesis on Earth, molecular oxygen
accumulated slowly in the atmosphere. The presence of free oxygen made evolution of
aerobic respiration possible.
Mechanism: The complete breakdown of glucose molecule occurs only in aerobic respiration.
During this process, glucose is broken down to pyruvic acid which is then completely oxidized
to CO2 and water and all the energy stored in its C-H bonds, is released.
Stages: Cellular respiration is a continuous process, but for study purposes we can divide it
into four main stages.
1. Glycolysis 2. Pyruvic acid oxidation
3. Krebs cycle or citric acid cycle 4. Electron transport chain and chemiosmosis
Glycolysis occurs in the cytosol and oxygen is not essential for this stage. The other three
stages occur within mitochondria where the presence of oxygen is essential.

--- Page 13 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Aerobic Respiration
Anaerobic Respiration
CO2
CO2
CO2
Glycolysis
Krebs
cycle
H2O
2 ATP
Electron
Transport
Chain
O2
2 ATP
32 ATP
(Cytosol)
(Mitochondrion)
Fig: Overview of cellular respiration

Q14. What is glycolysis? Explain how is glucose broken down to pyruvic acid in
glycolysis?
Ans. Definition: Glycolysis is the breakdown of glucose into two molecules of pyruvic
acid. Glycolysis takes place in both types of respiration i.e., anaerobic and aerobic.
Enzymes: The breakdown of glucose takes place in a series of steps, each catalysed by a
specific enzyme. All these enzymes are found dissolved in the cytosol. In addition to the
enzymes, ATP and coenzyme NAD+ (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) are also essential.
Glycolysis involves following reactions.
1. Preparatory Phase
It involves the expenditure of energy and the breakdown of glucose. It consists of the
following steps;
• A phosphate group is transferred from ATP to glucose. As a result, glucose changes into
of glucose 6-phosphate.
• Glucose 6-phosphate is converted into its isomer called fructose 6-phosphate.
• Another ATP molecule transfers a second phosphate group to fructose 6-phosphate. So, it
becomes fructose 1, 6-biphosphate.
• Fructose 1, 6-biphosphate is highly reactive and breaks into two molecules of three-carbon
intermediates i.e., glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P) and dihydroxy acetone
phosphate (DAP). These are inter-converted and result in two molecules of G3P.
2. Oxidative Phase
It involves the removal of hydrogen from G3P and packing of released energy in the form of
ATP. It consists of the following steps:
Occurrence: Glycolysis occurs in cytosol and oxygen is not essential for it.
• Each G3P is oxidized to its acidic form. In this step, two hydrogen atoms (containing two
high-energy electrons) are removed from G3P and transferred to NAD+. At the same time,

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 14 ---
an inorganic phosphate group is also added to G3P. It results in a molecule of 1,3-biphosphoglyceric acid (1, 3-BPGA).
• The phosphate group is transferred from 1,3-BPGA to ADP. So, 1,3-BPGA changes into 3-phosphoglyceric acid (3-PGA). A molecule of ATP is also formed in this step.
• 3-PGA is converted to 2-phosphoglyceric acid (2-PGA).
• 2-PGA is dehydrated (water removed) into phosphoenol pyruvic acid (PEP).
• PEP gives up its high energy phosphate to convert a second molecule of ADP to ATP. As a result, PEP is changed into pyruvic acid.

Glucose (1)
ATP
ADP
Glucose 6 - phosphate (1)
Fructose 6 - phosphate (1)
ATP
ADP
Fructose 1, 6 - phosphate (1)
Glyceraldehyde 3- phosphate (1)
+
Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (1)
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (2)
2 NAD+
2 NADH + 2H+
1,3 Biphosphoglyceric acid (2)
2 ADP
2 ATP
3- Phosphoglyceric acid (2)
2- Phosphoglyceric acid (2)
H2O
Phosphoenol pyruvic acid (2)
2 ADP
2 ATP
Pyruvic acid (2)
Fig: Steps in glycolysis

Q15. Explain pyruvic acid oxidation.
Ans. Pyruvic acid does not directly participate in Krebs cycle. It has to go through the following changes before entering the Krebs cycle.
• A molecule of carbon dioxide is removed from pyruvic acid. So, it changes into acetaldehyde.
• Acetaldehyde is oxidized (hydrogen is removed) to make acetyl group. A molecule of NAD+ is reduced to NADH.
• Acetyl group combines with coenzyme-A (CoA) to form acetyl-CoA.

O O
|| ||
H3C — C — OH
Pyruvic acid
CO2
O
||
H3C — C — H
Acetaldehyde
NAD+ NADH + H+
O
||
H3C — C —
Acetyl Group
CoA
O
||
H3C — C — CoA
Acetyl CoA

--- Page 15 ---
Glucose enters cells from the tissue fluid by passive transport using a specific glucose carrier
The carrier can be controlled (gated) by hormones such as insulin.
Gluconeogenesis: Pyruvic acid can also be turned back into glucose by reversing glycolysis.
This is called gluconeogenesis.
Q16. Explain Krebs Cycle. / Describe how Krebs cycle is the completion of
oxidation of glycolytic products?
Ans. Krebs Cycle
This cycle was worked out by British biochemist, Sir Hans Krebs so it is called the Krebs
cycle. It is also called the citric acid cycle, after the six-carbon citric acid molecule formed in
its first step. All steps of the citric acid cycle occur in mitochondria. It involves following
reactions.
• Pyruvic acid formed during glycolysis is first converted into Acetyl CoA. It now enters
the cyclic series of chemical reactions of Kreb's cycle.
• Acetyl-CoA splits into CoA and acetyl group. The acetyl group combines with a four-
carbon molecule, oxaloacetic acid. As a result, six-carbon citric acid is formed.
• Citric acid undergoes an oxidative decarboxylation reaction. It is decarboxylated
(releasing a molecule of CO2) and then oxidized (reducing an NAD+ to NADH). So, a
five-carbon molecule called alpha-ketoglutaric acid is formed.
• Alpha-ketoglutaric acid undergoes further oxidation and decarboxylation. It results in the
formation of a four-carbon molecule i.e., succinic acid. Succinic acid joins with CoA and
makes succinyl CoA.

Fig: Krebs cycle

--- Page 16 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

• The bond between succinic acid and CoA is a high-energy linkage. It again splits into CoA
and succinic acid. The energy released in this reaction, is used in making a molecule of
ATP.
• Succinic acid is oxidized to fumaric acid. When its two hydrogen atoms are removed, the
free energy is not enough to reduce NAD+. So, a different electron acceptor i.e., the
coenzyme flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) is used and is reduced to FADH2.
• In order to regenerate oxaloacetic acid, a molecule of water added to fumaric acid and it
is changed to malic acid.
• Malic acid is oxidized to produce oxaloacetic acid. The hydrogen and electrons released
from malic acid convert an NAD+ to NADH. This completes the cycle and oxaloacetic
acid is now free to bind to another molecule of acetyl CoA to initiate the cycle.
Q17. Explain Electron Transport Chain and Chemiosmosis. / Define
chemiosmosis. How would you relate it with electron transport chain?
Ans. Electron Transport Chain
In electron transport chain the electrons are transferred from the reduced coenzymes i.e.,
NADH and FADH2 to a series of electron carriers and finally to oxygen. After getting the
electrons, the oxygen attaches with hydrogen ions and forms water.
The transfer of electrons to the series of carriers of electron transport chain results in oxidation
and reduction reactions i.e., a carrier is oxidized when it loses electrons and next carrier
transport.
Chemiosmosis: Chemiosmosis is the mechanism in which membranes are used to couple
these redox reactions with the synthesis of ATPs.
Pathway of electrons: The electrons transport chain of respiration is built in the inner
membrane of the mitochondrion. At the start of electron transport chain, NADH is oxidized,
and the released electrons are taken up by coenzyme Q. The reduced CoQ transports electrons
to cytochrome ‘b’ which in turn transports them to cytochrome ‘c’. Cytochrome ‘c’ then
transports electrons to cytochrome ‘a’ complex (a complex of two cytochromes). This
complex transports electrons to an atom of oxygen that is present at the bottom end of the
chain.

NADH NAD+
FADH2 FAD
Flow of electrons
CoQ
Cyt b
Cyt c
Cyt a
Cyt a3
2H+
Reduction
Oxidation
½O2
H2O
Fig: Pathway of electrons

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 17 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q18. How ATPs are synthesized in mitochondria?
Ans. Synthesis of ATP: As redox (reduction-oxidation) occurs, the energy released from
the electrons is used for the active transport of H+ ions from one side (the matrix of
mitochondrion) of the membrane to the other (the inter-membrane space). In this way, many
H+ ions are deposited in the inter-membrane space. The resulting H+ ion gradient stores
potential energy. The H+ ions diffuse back along their concentration gradient from the inter
membrane space to the matrix.

[IMAGE CONTENT]
Inner
mitochondrial
membrane
ATP
synthase
NADH
(carrying electrons
from food)
NAD+
FADH2
2 H+ + 1/2 O2
H2O
ADP + P
ATP
H+
1 Electron transport chain 2 Chemiosmosis
Fig: Electron transport chain and chemiosmosis in mitochondrion

On their way they pass through a special protein known as ATP synthase. As the H+ ions move
through this protein, their flow drives the synthesis of ATP Oxidation of one molecule of
NADH in electron transport chain produces three ATP While oxidation of one FADH2
produces two ATP. At the end, the two hydrogen ions are taken by the oxygen atom which
has also taken two electrons to form water.
Q19. Explain substrate- level phosphorylation.
Ans. Cells generate ATP by phosphorylation i.e. adding a phosphate group to ADP A cell
has two ways to do this: chemiosmotic phosphorylation (chemiosmosis) and substrate-level
phosphorylation. Substrate-level phosphorylation is much simpler than chemiosmosis. It
does not involve any membrane or electron transport chain. In this process, an enzyme
transfers a phosphate group from an organic substrate molecule to ADP. The products are a
new organic molecule and a molecule of ATP. For example; during the last step of glycolysis,
an enzyme transfers phosphate group from phosphoenol pyruvic (PEP) acid to ADP. As a
result, ADP becomes ATP and PEP is changed into pyruvic acid. Substrate-level
phosphorylation accounts for only a small percentage of the ATP that a cell generates. This
reaction can be shown as:

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 18 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

O O
|| ||
C O-P-O- + P
|| | |
CH2 O O
|
Ribose-Adenine
Rhyosphoenol ADP
Pyruvic acid

O O O-
|| || |
C O-P=O
|| |
CH2 P
|
P
|
O
|
Ribose-Adenine
ATP

Q20. Give the overview of the energy extracted from the oxidation of glucose.

Ans. The NADH and FADH2 produced during glycolysis and Krebs cycle pass on their
energy-rich electrons to the electron transport chain and ATPs are produced.
The NADH molecule generated in
the Krebs cycle causes the
production of three ATP molecules,
during chemiosmosis.
extracted from the aerobic
oxidation of glucose
• Glycolysis takes place in
cytoplasm and the NADH,
produced during glycolysis,
have to be transported across
the mitochondrial membrane.
It costs one ATP molecule per
NADH. Thus each NADH of
glycolysis produces two ATP
molecules in the final balance
sheet instead of three.
• Each FADH2 molecule leads to
the production of two ATP
molecules.
In this way, aerobic oxidation of
glucose yields a net profit of 36
ATP molecules. While during the glycolysis of anaerobic oxidation only 2 ATP molecules
are generated. Thus, aerobic oxidation is 18 times more efficient than anaerobic.
Q21. Through which ways proteins and fats enter cellular respiration?
Ans.
• Free glucose molecules are not common in our diet. Rather, we consume sucrose and
other disaccharides, starch, and fats and proteins.
• Proteins may also be used as fuel but they must be digested to their constituent amino
acids.
• Typically, a cell uses most of the amino acids to make its own proteins.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 19 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

• Some amino acids are deaminated (amino group detached) and then are converted to other
organic compounds.
• These compounds are usually converted to pyruvic acid, acetyl CoA. or the organic acids
in the Krebs cycle, and their energy is converted to ATP
• Lipids are excellent cellular fuel because they contain many carbon-hydrogen bonds.
They are first hydrolysed into glycerol and fatty acids.
• Glycerol is converted to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, an intermediate in glycolysis.
• While the fatty acids are changed into acetyl CoA. In this way both the fatty acids and the
glycerol enter cellular respiration.

PHOTORESPIRATION

Q22. What is photorespiration? Explain its mechanism and disadvantages.

Ans. Photorespiration
The respiratory activity that occurs in green cells in the presence of light resulting in release
of carbon dioxide is termed as photorespiration. It needs oxygen and produces CO2 and H2O
like aerobic respiration. However, ATP is not produced during photorespiration.
Mechanism of Photorespiration
RuBP carboxylase (rubisco) catalyses the addition of CO2 to RuBP to make phosphoglyceric
acid (phosphoglycerate), which is further reduced to form glucose. However, when the
relative concentration of CO2 decreases and there is more oxygen in leaf cells, rubisco adds
O2 in RuBP instead of CO2. It results in the breakdown of RuBP into two molecules i.e., one
phosphoglycerate and
one phosphoglycolate (a
two-carbon molecule).
Phosphoglycolate is
converted into
glycolate, which moves
from chloroplast to
peroxisome. Here, it is
metabolized to
glyoxylate by using O2.
This reaction also
produces toxic
hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2). Glyoxylate is
then converted to
glycine, which is
transported to
mitoehondrion. Here,
two molecules of
glycine form a molecule

Fig: Reactions of photorespiration

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 20 ---
of serine. Serine is then transported to peroxisome. Here, it is converted to glycerate. From
peroxisome, glycerate moves to chloroplast, where it is changed to phosphoglycerate which
can re-enter Calvin cycle.
Disadvantages of Photorespiration
• Plants that use Calvin cycle to fix carbon are called C-3 plants. When photorespiration
occurs in these plants, they lose between a 25% to 50% of their fixed carbon. It results in
reduction in their yields.
• The rate of photorespiration also depends on temperature. At higher temperatures the
oxidative activity of rubisco increases than its carbon fixing activity. In tropical climates,
especially those in which the temperature is often above 28°C, the problem is a severe and
it has a major negative impact on agricultural yields.
• When photosynthesis first evolved, there was little oxygen in the atmosphere. So, there
was little or no photorespiration. After millions of years, free O2 accumulated in the
atmosphere and competition started between CO2 and O2 for the same active site of
rubisco. It led to the problem that photorespiration now poses.
Q23. How is the process of C-4 photosynthesis an adaptation to deal with the
problem of photorespiration?
Ans. Adaptations to the problems of Photorespiration
Plants of warmer climates evolved the following two ways to deal with the problem of
photorespiration.
C-4 Photosynthesis
Some plants including grasses (corn, sugarcane and sorghum) and about two dozen other plant
groups run a special pathway called C-4 photosynthesis in addition to the normal Calvin
cycle. In their leaves, the mesophyll cells have less air spaces. The enzymes of Calvin cycle
are more deposited in specialized cells called bundle- sheath cells, which are impermeable
to CO2.
During C-4 photosynthesis in mesophyll cells, CO2, is attached with a 3-carbon molecule
called phosphoenol pyruvic acid. It results in the formation of a four-carbon molecule
oxaloacetic acid. Due to this first 4-C product, this process is called C-4 photosynthesis and
the plants are called C-4 plants. Oxaloacetic acid is then converted to malic acid, by using
NADH. Malic acid is broken down to pyruvic acid and CO2. These cells can hold CO2 in
them. So, concentration of CO2 increases in these cells and they run Calvin cycle instead of
photorespiration. Pyruvic acid produced in bundle sheath cells returns to mesophyll cell and
is converted again to phosphoenol pyruvic acid b using and ATP.

--- Page 21 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Mesophyll cell
CO2
RuBP Calvin
Cycle
Sugar
C-3 Photosynthesis

Mesophyll cell Bundle sheath cell
CO2
Oxaloacetic
acid (4-C)
Phosphoenol Malic acid CO2
Pyruvic acid (4-c)
(3-C)
Pyruvic acid Pyruvic acid Calvin
(3-C) (3-C) Cycle
Sugar
C-4 Photosynthesis

Fig: C-3 photosynthesis and C-4 photosynthesis
Q24. What is CAM metabolism?
Ans. In hot climates, many succulent plant such as Cacti, pineapples and some other plant
groups perform Crassulacean acid metabolism or CAM (after the plant family Crassulaceae
in which it was first discovered). In
these plants, the stomata open during
the night and close during the day.
Closing stomata during the day
prevents water loss and removal of
CO2. So, rate of photorespiration is
reduced due to high concentration of
carbon dioxide. The carbon dioxide
necessary for producing sugar is
provided from organic molecules
made the night before. Like C-4
plants, these plants use both C-4 and
C-3 pathways.

Sunlight
Heat
O2
H2O
ATP
NADP NADPH NAD NADH
ADP
ATP
ATP
Calvin CO2 Krebs
cycle cycle
Glucose Pyruvic acid

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch6 Long Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [26/36]: 11th Bio New Ch6 MCQ's.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

                               Unit 6: Bioenergetics

                           Multiple Choice Questions

                     MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)

1. What main process occurs during the

   dark reaction of photosynthesis?

   (a) Release of oxygen

   (b) Energy absorption by chlorophyll

   (c) Adding of hydrogen to CO2

   (d) Formation of ATP

2. What is TRUE about glycolysis?

   (a) It produces no ATP

   (b) It takes place only in aerobic

       respiration

   (c) It takes place in the mitochondrion

   (d) It reduces 2 molecules of NAD+ for

       every glucose molecule processed

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
3. Which of the following are produced
by the reactions that occur in the
thylakoid and consumed by the
reactions that occur in the stroma?
(a) CO2 and H2O
(b) Glucose and O2
(c) NADP+ and ADP
(d) ATP and NADPH
4. When deprived of oxygen, yeast cells
obtain energy by fermentation,
producing CO2, ATP and;
(a) Acetyl CoA
(b) Ethyl Alcohol
(c) Lactic Acid
(d) Pyruvic Acid
5. Conversion of Glucose 6-phosphate
into Fructose 6-phosphate is;
(a) Isomerization (b) Polymerization
(c) Condensation (d) Phosphorylation
6. In which of the following conversions,
ATP is produced?
(a) Alpha ketoglutaric acid into succinyl
CoA
(b) Succinyl CoA into succinic acid
(c) Succinic acid into fumaric acid
(d) Fumaric acid into malic acid

7. In electron transport chain, FADH:H
produces how many ATPs?
(a) One (b) Two
(c) Three (d) Four
8. Which of these is CO2 acceptor during
photosynthesis?
(a) Malic acid
(b) Ribulose biphosphate
(c) Oxaloacetic acid
(d) Phosphoglyceric acid
9. Which of the following takes the
electrons lost by Photosystem I on
absorption of light energy?
(a) Ferredoxin
(b) Cytochrome
(c) Cytochrome a-3
(d) Plastocyanin
10. Photosystem-II makes up the electrons
lost due to light excitation by taking up
the electrons released from,
(a) Ferredoxin
(b) NADPH:H+
(c) Plastocyanin
(d) Photolysis of water

SLO BASED MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
Photosynthesis
11. Nearly all the energy used by living
organisms on earth comes from:
(a) Photosynthesis
(b) Respiration
(c) Alcoholic Fermentation
(d) Lactic acid fermentation
12. Which is the energy currency of cell:
(a) ATP (b) water
(c) glucose (d) Fat
13. The breaking of one phosphate bond
release how much energy.
(a) 4.3 Kcal (b) 5.3 Kcal
(c) 6.3 Kcal (d) 7.3 Kcal

14. Cells get energy from which process of
food
(a) Digestion (b) Oxidation
(c) Respiration (d) Excretion
15. Which of the following is included in
reactant side of photosynthesis?
(a) Water (b) Oxygen
(c) Glucose (d) Nitrogen
16. At which movement there is no net gas
exchange between leaves and
atmosphere:
(a) Saturation period
(b) Compensation point
(c) End point
(d) Starting point

--- Page 3 ---
17. Plants convert how much solar energy
into chemical energy
(a) 1-2% (b) 3-4%
(c) 5-6% (d) 6-7%
18. The effectiveness of different
wavelength of light is determined in
terms of:
(a) Absorption spectrum
(b) Active spectrum
(c) Broad spectrum
(d) Narrow spectrum
19. The entry of CO2 into the leaves is
dependent upon
(a) Opening of stomata
(b) External humidity
(c) Water availability
(d) Intensity of light
20. Source of O2 during process of
photosynthesis is:
(a) Light (b) CO2
(c) H2O (d) Glucose
21. In photosynthesis water is split during
the process
(a) Hydrolysis
(b) Photolysis
(c) Analysis
(d) Chemolysis
22. What serves as reducing power for the
reduction of CO2 to form sugar
(a) NADPH (b) NADP
(c) FADH2 (d) FAD
23. Chlorophyll is what type of molecule
(a) Protein (b) Lipid
(c) Vitamin (d) Carbohydrate
24. The central atom of chlorophyll
molecule is.
(a) Mg++ (b) Ca++
(c) Fe+2 (d) N+
25. A molecule of chlorophyll consists of a
hydrophilic head and
(a) Hydrophobic tail
(b) Hydrophilic tail
(c) Oxidative tail
(d) Reductive tail

26. Chlorophyll absorb mainly.
(a) Violet – blue and orange – red
(b) Violet – green and indigo – red
(c) Yellow green and yellow – red
(d) Yellow red and orange – red
27. Head of chlorophyll molecule is made
of:
(a) Porphyrin ring
(b) Carbon ring
(c) Nitrogen ring
(d) Hydrocarbon ring
28. Porphyrin ring of chlorophyll molecule
consists of how many pyrrole rings:
(a) 1 (b) 2
(c) 3 (d) 4
29. In chlorophyll-a, the second pyrrole
ring has
(a) CH3 group (b) CHO group
(c) NH2 group (d) COOH group
30. Carotenoids absorb light energy in
which regions:
(a) Blue Green (b) Yellow Green
(c) Yellow Red (d) Red Green
31. Phycobilins are accessory pigments
found in:
(a) Plants (b) Cyanobacteria
(c) Bacteria (d) Fungi
32. A graph showing different wavelengths
absorbed by a pigment is called
(a) Absorption spectrum
(b) Broad spectrum
(c) Active spectrum
(d) Narrow spectrum
33. Photosystems of photosynthesis
pigments are embedded in.
(a) Cristae (b) Lamella
(c) Thylakoid (d) Stroma
34. Each photosystem consists of a light
gathering
(a) Antenna complex
(b) Chloroplast complex
(c) Grana complex
(d) Cytochrome complex

--- Page 4 ---
35. Photosystem I has which chlorophyll-a
molecule in its reaction centre
(a) p600 (b) p650
(c) p700 (d) p750
36. Reaction centre of PS-II has
chlorophyll-a, which aborbs best light
of
(a) 500 nm (b) 580 nm
(c) 600 nm (d) 680 nm
37. The light dependent reaction take
place on:
(a) Thylakoid membrane (b) Cristae
(c) F1-particles (d) Stroma
38. Light independent reactions take place
in the
(a) Stroma of chloroplast
(b) Matrix of mitochondria
(c) Lomen of Golgi apparatus
(d) Granum of thylakoids
39. Which is not part of light dependent
reactions of photosynthesis
(a) Absorption of light energy
(b) Excitation of electrons
(c) Photophosphorylation
(d) Oxidative phosphorylation
40. What is not true for non-cyclic
photophosphorylation?
(a) PS-I and PS-II participate
(b) Two electron chains are involved
(c) Only ATPs are produced
(d) Both ATP and NADPH are produced
41. The main source of atmospheric
oxygen is:
(a) Respiration (b) Photosynthesis
(c) Water (d) Photorespiration
42. ATPs are produced through the
process of
(a) Chemiosmosis (b) Reverse osmosis
(c) Photolysis (d) Analysis
43. The zigzag pathway taken by electrons
through PS-II and PS-I and electron
transport chain is called:
(a) P-Scheme (b) Z-scheme
(c) C-scheme (d) F-scheme

44. Cyclic photophosphorylation occurs
when Calvin cycle slows down and:
(a) NADPH accumulation
(b) ATP accumulation
(c) NADPH deficiency
(d) Nitrogen deficiency
45. There is no production of NADPH and
oxygen during
(a) Non-cyclic photophosphorylation
(b) Cyclic photophosphorylation
(c) Oxidative phosphorylation
(d) Oxidation and reduction
46. During chemiosmosis which structures
coupled the redox reaction with
synthesis of ATP?
(a) Thylakoid membrane
(b) Cell membrane
(c) F1-particles
(d) Cristae
47. Light independent reactions occur in:
(a) Thylakoid
(b) Granum
(c) Matrix
(d) Stroma
48. What is true for dark reactions?
(a) Can occur only in dark
(b) Can occur in presence as well as in
absence of light
(c) Can occur only in the presence of light
(d) Can occur in chloroplast as well as in
mitochondria
49. Carbon fixation refers to the initial
incorporation of CO2 into:
(a) Organic material
(b) Inorganic compound
(c) Mesophyll cell
(d) Lumen of thylakoid
50. The most abundant protein on earth is
(a) Rubisco (b) Active
(c) Myosis (d) Tropomyosin
51. Calvin cycle is also known as:
(a) C-2 pathway (b) C-3 pathway
(c) C-5 pathway (d) C-6 pathway

--- Page 5 ---
52. During reduction phase of Calvin cycle
how many NADPH are used:
(a) 1 (b) 3
(c) 6 (d) 9
Cellular Respiration
53. Almost all cells in all organisms use it
as energy source:
(a) Glucose (b) Starch
(c) Protein (d) Vitamin
54. During glycolysis, glucose molecule is
split into two molecules of:
(a) Acetyl CoA
(b) Pyruvate
(c) Phosphoenol pyruvate
(d) Ethanol pyruvate
55. The energy of 2ATPs is equivalent to
(a) 10.6 Kcal
(b) 14.6 Kcal
(c) 24.6 Kcal
(d) 34.6 Kcal
56. As a result of anaerobic respiration one
glucose molecule yields only two ATPs
which equals to about how much of
energy present in it.
(a) 2% (b) 4%
(c) 6% (d) 8%
57. In yeast during alcoholic fermentation
pyruvic acid is further broken down
into alcohol and
(a) CO2 (b) O2
(c) N2 (d) NH3
58. Which process occurs in muscle cells of
humans during extreme physical
activities and insufficient oxygen
(a) Alcoholic fermentation
(b) Aerobic respiration
(c) Lactic acid fermentation
(d) Photophorylation
59. During aerobic respiration glucose is
completely oxidized into:
(a) CO2+H2O
(b) Pyruvate + H2O
(c) Alcohol + CO2
(d) Lactic acid +CO2

60. Enzymes of glycolysis are
(a) Present on crisate of mitochondria
(b) Thylakoid of chloroplast
(c) Dissolved in stroma
(d) Dissolved in cytoplasm
61. Which process is common both in
photosynthesis and respiration:
(a) Glycolysis
(b) Pyruvic acid oxidation
(c) Krebs cycle
(d) Electron transport chain and
chemiosmosis
62. Which is not essential of glycolysis?
(a) Oxygen (b) Enzymes
(c) Glucose (d) Aerobic condition
63. Which of the following are
interconverted during glycolysis
(a) Glucose-6-PO4 and Fructose-6-PO4
(b) Dihydroxy acetone PO4 and
glyceraldehyde 3-PO4
(c) 3 Phosphoglyceric acid and 2
phosphoglycerialdehyde
(d) Pyruvate and Phosphoenol pyruvate
64. In which of glycolysis Glucose is
converted into Glucose-6-PO4:
(a) 1st step (b) 2nd step
(c) 3rd step (d) 4th step
65. Pyruvic acid can also be turned back
into glucose by reversing glycolysis, the
process called as:
(a) Reverse glycolysis
(b) Reverse osmosis
(c) Gluconeogenesis
(d) Lactic acidosis
66. Before entry into Krebs's cycle Pyruvic
acid is activated to:
(a) Acetyl CoA (b) Pyruvate
(c) Oxaloacetate (d) Succinyl CoA
67. Another name for Kreb's cycle is:
(a) Citric acid cycle
(b) Carbon acid cycle
(c) Lactic acid cycle
(d) Phosphoric acid cycle

--- Page 6 ---
68. All steps of citric acid cycle occur in
(a) Cytosol (b) Mitochondria
(c) Chloroplast (d) Peroxisomes
69. First stable compound of Krebs cycle is
(a) Citric acid
(b) Ketoglutaric acid
(c) $\alpha$ Succinic acid
(d) Fumaric acid
70. How many NADH molecules are
formed during Kreb's cycle
(a) 1 (b) 2
(c) 3 (d) 4
71. During electron transport chain the
electrons from reduced coenzymes are
finally transferred to:
(a) Cytochrome-a (b) Cytochrome-c
(c) Oxygen (d) Cytochrome-a3
72. How many molecules of ATP are
generated during Kreb's cycle
(a) None (b) One
(c) Two (d) Three
73. Oxidation of one molecule of NADH
produces how many ATPs.
(a) One (b) Two
(c) Three (d) Four
74. In substrate level phosphorylation,
ATP is produced by:
(a) Enzyme (b) Chemiosmosis
(c) Reduction (d) Oxidation

Photorespiration
75. Photorespiration occurs in green cells
in:
(a) Absence of light
(b) Presence of light
(c) Presence of water
(d) Presence of light CO2
76. Photorespiration involves mitochondria
chloroplast and:
(a) Lysosomes (b) Peroxisomes
(c) Glyoxisomes (d) Ribosomes
77. Plants of warmer climates deal with
the problem of photorespiration by:
(a) C-2 photosynthesis
(b) C-3 photosynthesis
(c) C-4 photosynthesis
(d) C-5 photosynthesis
78. CAM metabolism is present in:
(a) Cacti (b) Mango
(c) Rose (d) Mustard
79. Which pathway occurs in CAM
plants:
(a) C-3 pathway
(b) C-4 pathway
(c) C-3 and C-4 pathway
(d) C-2 pathway

ANSWER KEY
1. c 2. d 3. d 4. b 5. a 6. b 7. b
8. b 9. a 10. d 11. a 12. a 13. d 14. c
15. a 16. b 17. a 18. b 19. a 20. c 21. b
22. a 23. b 24. a 25. a 26. a 27. a 28. d
29. a 30. a 31. b 32. a 33. c 34. a 35. c
36. d 37. a 38. a 39. d 40. c 41. b 42. a
43. b 44. a 45. b 46. a 47. d 48. b 49. a
50. a 51. b 52. c 53. a 54. b 55. b 56. a
57. a 58. c 59. a 60. d 61. d 62. a 63. b
64. a 65. c 66. a 67. a 68. b 69. a 70. c
71. c 72. b 73. c 74. a 75. b 76. b 77. c
78. a 79. c

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch6 MCQ's.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [27/36]: 11th Bio New Ch6 Short Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 6: Bioenergetics

Short Questions

SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS EXERCISE

Q1. Differentiate between action spectrum and absorption spectrum?
Ans.
Absorption Spectrum | Action Spectrum
A graph showing different wavelength absorbed by pigments is called absorption spectrum. | A graph showing effectiveness of different wavelength on the rate of process of photosynthesis is called action spectrum.

Q2. How is photosynthesis a redox reaction?
Ans. As CO2 photosynthesis is redox (reduction-oxidation) reaction where CO2 is reduced to form glucose and water is oxidized to release oxygen.

Q3. Which molecule contributes Oxygen to glucose during photosynthesis? Water or carbon dioxide!
Ans. It is carbon dioxide that contributes oxygen to glucose while oxygen of water is released into atmosphere.

Q4. State the role of CO2 in photosynthesis.
Ans. CO2 acts as source of carbon for making sugars during photosynthesis. Sugar is formed by the reduction of CO2 by using ATP and NADPH. In this way, CO2 acts as the source of carbon for making sugars.

Q5. Define electron transport chain.
Ans. An electron transport chain is a series of protein complexes and other molecules which transfer electrons from electron donors to electron acceptors via redox reactions.

Q6. What do you mean by glycolysis?
Ans. Glycolysis is breakdown of glucose molecule into two molecules of pyruvic acid.

Q7. What is the main structural difference between chlorophyll-a and chlorophyll-b?
Ans. Chlorophyll-a has CH3 at second pyrrole ring while chlorophyll-b has CHO.

Q8. How can a cell synthesize ATP through substrate-level phosphorylation?
Ans. A cell can synthesize ATP through substrate level phosphorylation with the help of enzyme.

Q9. Can pyruvic acid enter Krebs cycle as such? If not, what changes are made to it before Krebs cycle?
Ans. Pyruvic acid cannot enter Krebs cycle as such. It is first converted into acetyl CoA.

Q10. Differentiate between C-3 and C-4 photosynthesis?
Ans. In C3-plants CO2 reacts with ribulose bis PO4 molecule and results in a 3-C stable molecule 3 phosphoglyceric acid while in C4-plant, CO2 combine with phosphoenol pyruvic acid (3-C molecule) and results in a 4-Carbon stable compound oxaloacetic acid.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

SLO BASED SHORT QUESTION ANSWERS
Bioenergetics
Q11. What is bioenergetics?
Ans. Bioenergetics is the study of how energy flows through living systems. It explores the processes through which cells store and expend energy.
★Q12.What is main source of energy in food chain?
Ans. Nearly all the energy used by living organisms on Earth comes from photosynthesis. Plants, algae, and certain bacteria capture sunlight and convert it into chemical energy, forming the base of the food chain.
Q13. Write a note on ATP?
Ans. Cells use a special energy currency for their reactions. This currency is actually a nucleotide called adenosine triphosphate (ATP) When cells store energy, they make ATP. When cells need energy, they break ATP. A molecule of ATP has three subunits i.e., adenine, (a nitrogen containing base); ribose (a five-carbon sugar) and three phosphate groups.
Photosynthesis
Q14. Define photosynthesis. Write its equation?
Ans. Photosynthesis involves the use of light energy that is absorbed and converted into chemical energy by photosynthetic pigments. Photosynthesis in plants can be summarized as:
6CO₂ + 12H₂O + Light → C₆H₁₂O₆ + 6O₂ + 6H₂O
★Q15. What is compensation point?
Ans. At dawn and dusk, when light intensity is low, the rate of photosynthesis and respiration may be equal for a short time. Thus, the oxygen released from photosynthesis is just equal to the amount required for cellular respiration. Also, the carbon dioxide released by respiration is just equal to the amount required by photosynthesizing cells. At this moment there is no net gas exchange between leaves and atmosphere. This is termed as compensation point.
★Q16. How much solar energy is converted by plant into chemical energy?
Ans. Plants convert only about 1-2% of the solar energy they receive into chemical energy during photosynthesis. Despite this seemingly low efficiency, this conversion is enough to sustain almost all life on Earth.
Q17. What is action spectrum?
Ans. The different wavelengths are also differently effective in photosynthesis. The effectiveness of different wavelengths of light is determined in terms of action spectrum. For getting action spectrum of light, a plant is illuminated with different colours of light one by one. While providing each colour, the rate of photosynthesis is measured by measuring the amount of oxygen emitted from leaves. The data is plotted in a graph called action spectrum.
Q18. Write the role of light in photosynthesis?
Ans. Light plays a crucial role in photosynthesis, providing the energy required to drive the chemical reactions that transform simple molecules into complex organic compounds. Light energy is absorbed by chlorophyll. The absorbed light energy is converted into chemical energy, which is in turn stored in organic compounds in the form of C-H bond energy.
Q19. Write the role of water in photosynthesis?
Ans. Oxygen released during photosynthesis comes from water, and so water is an important source of atmospheric

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 3 ---
oxygen which most organisms need for
aerobic respiration and thus for obtaining
energy to live.
Q20. Write about parts of chlorophyll
molecule.
Ans. A molecule of chlorophyll consists of
two parts.
1. Hydrophilic head: It is made of porphyrin
ring made up of four pyrole rings with
magnesium atom in center.
2. Hydrophobic tail: Tail is made of long
hydrocarbon change. It anchors the
molecule in the thylakoid membrane.
★Q21.From where land and aquatic
plants get CO2?
Ans. About 10% of total photosynthesis is
carried out be terrestrial plants, the rest
occurs in oceans, lakes and ponds. Aquatic
photosynthetic organisms use dissolved CO2,
bicarbonates and soluble carbonates as
carbon source. Land photosynthesis
organisms use atmospheric CO2 as carbon
source.
Q22. Write Role of Photosynthetic
Pigments?
Ans. Photosynthetic pigments are present
in thylakoid membranes. These pigments
capture light energy necessary for
photosynthesis. Some of the pigments are
chlorophyll a, chlorophyll-b, xanthophylls,
carotenes. Different pigments absorb light of
different wavelengths (colours).
Q23. Give composition of photosystem.
Ans. Each photosystem consists of two
parts
1. Antenna complex: It has many pigment
molecules reaction center.
2. Reaction center: The reaches center has
one or more molecules of chlorophyll-a
which pass the high energy electrons to
primary electron acceptor.
Q24. What is reaction center?
Ans. The reaction centre has one or more
molecules of chlorophyll-a which pass the
light energy electron to a primary electron
accepter. This passes them on the series of
electron carriers called electron transport
chain.
★Q25.Give role of Carotenoids?
Ans. Carotenoids, such as beta-carotene,
play dual role in photosynthesis. They
capture light energy in the blue and green
regions of the spectrum and protect the
photosynthetic apparatus from damage by
excess light.
Q26. What are accessory pigments and
their role?
Ans. Accessory pigments include all the
pigments, other than chlorophyll-a, which
can gather light for photosynthesis.
Chlorophyll b is an accessory pigment and
others are carotenoids (carotenes and
xanthophylls) and phycobilins. Chlorophyll b
and carotenoids are found in plants while
phycobilins are found in the red algae and
cyanobacteria.
When accessory pigments absorb light, they
pass on the energy towards chlorophyll a. It
is generally believed that the order of transfer
of energy in plants is;
Carotenoids → Chlorophyll b → Chlorophyll-a
★Q27.Why more than one pigment are
present in plants?
Ans. Some wavelengths are not absorbed
by chlorophyll-a are very effectively
absorbed by chlorophyll-b and vice-versa.
Such differences increase the range of light
absorbed by both chlorophylls.
Q28. What is Absorption Spectrum and
Action Spectrum?
Ans. A graph showing different
wavelengths absorbed by a pigment is called
absorption spectrum of the pigment.
Absorption spectrum of chlorophylls

--- Page 4 ---
WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

indicates that absorption of blue light (430
nm) and red light (670 nm) is maximum.
Absorption peaks of carotenoids are different
from those of chlorophylls. Action spectrum
of photosynthesis also shows that blue and
red parts lights are the most effective. This
means that the action spectrum of
photosynthesis coincides with the absorption
spectrum of photosynthetic pigments.

Q32. Why non-cyclic photophosphorylation
is called z-scheme?
Ans. The zigzag path taken by electrons
through PS-II and PS-I and electron transport
chains is called z-scheme.
Q33. What is chemiosmosis?
Ans. Chemiosmosis is the mechanism in
which thylakoid membranes couple the redox
reactions with the synthesis of ATP
Q34. Why light independent reactions
are called Dark reaction?
Ans. These are called dark reactions
because these can occur in the absence as
well as in the present of light, as long as ATP
and NADPH are available.
★Q35. Why calvin cycle is also known as
C-3 pathway?
Ans. Since the product of initial carbon
fixation is a three-carbon compound, the
Calvin cycle is also known as C-3 pathway.
Q36. Which enzymes mediate first
reaction of calvin cycle?
Ans. Rubisco (Ribulose bis Phosphate
Carboxylase and oxygenase) mediates the
first reaction of Calvin cycle.
Q37. Which molecules from Calvin cycle
make the sugar?
Ans. During calcium cycle one molecule of
glyceraldehyde 3PO4 is produced which
combines with another G3P and make
Glucose during Calvin cycle.
★Q38. What is main source of
atmospheric O2?
Ans. The oxygen produced during
photolysis of water is the main source of
atmospheric oxygen.

★Q29. What happens in light and dark
reaction?
Ans. During light dependent (light)
reaction, light energy is absorbed and
converted into chemical energy, which is in
the form of reducing and assimilating powers
i.e., NADPH and ATP.
Light independent (dark) reactions use
NADPH and ATP for the reduction CO2 and
thus store chemical energy in the form of C-
H bond energy.
Q30. What is non-cyclic
photophosphorylation?
Ans. It is a way of production of ATPs
during light dependent reactions. In this both
photosystems i.e., PS-I and PS-II participate
and two electron chains are involved. During
this ATP and NADPH are produced
alongwith evolution of O2.
Q31. What is photolysis?
Ans. When water molecule reacts with
oxidized chlorophyll in PS-II, it breaks into
two hydrogen ions, an oxygen atom and two
electrons. This water splitting step of
photosynthesis is called photolysis.

Cellular Respiration
Q39. What are the types of respiration?
Ans.
1. Anaerobic respiration (fermentation)
takes place in the absence of oxygen.
2. Aerobic respiration takes place in the
presence of oxygen.

REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM
WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM

--- Page 5 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

In the first step of both these types, glucose is
split into two molecules of pyruvic acid
(C3H4O3) in a process called glycolysis. The
next reactions of pyruvic acid are different in
anaerobic and aerobic respiration.
★Q40. Differentiate between external
respiration and cellular respiration?

Ans. The exchange of CO2 and O2 between
the organism and its environment is called
external respiration or breathing. Cellular
respiration is the process by which energy is
made available to cells in a step-by-step
oxidation of food in the cells.
Q41. What do you know about anaerobic
respiration?
Ans. In anaerobic respiration, glucose is
not completely oxidized. This type of
respiration yields relatively small amount of
energy from glucose molecule. As a result of
anaerobic respiration, one glucose molecule
yields only two ATPs (only about 2% of the
energy present in glucose). The energy in two
ATPs is equivalent to 14.6 kcal.
Q42. Define types of fermentation?
Ans.
a. Alcoholic Fermentation: In primitive
prokaryotic cells (bacteria) and in some
eukaryotic cells such as yeast, pyruvic acid is
further broken down by alcoholic
fermentation into alcohol (C2H5OH) and
CO2.
2(C3H4O3) 4H → 2(C3H6O3)
Pyruvic acid Ethyl alcohol
b. Lactic Acid Fermentation: In lactic
acid fermentation, each pyruvic acid
molecule is converted into lactic acid C2H6O3
in the absence of oxygen gas.
2(C3H4O3) → 2(C2H5 OH) + 2 CO2
Pyruvic acid Ethyl alcohol

★Q43. How glucose is absorbed by cell?

Ans. Glucose enters cells from the tissue
fluid by passive transport using a specific
glucose carrier. This carrier can be controlled
(gated) by hormones such as insulin.
★Q44. What is gluconeogenesis?
Ans. Pyruvic acid can also be turned back
into glucose by reversing glycolysis. This is
called gluconeogenesis.
Q45. Mention four stages of aerobic
respiration?
Ans.
1. Glycolysis
2. Pyruvic acid oxidation
3. Krebs Cycle
4. Electron transport chain
Q46. What is substrate-level
phosphorylation?
Ans. In this process, an enzyme transfers a
phosphate group from an organic substrate
molecule to ADP The products are a new
organic molecule and a molecule of ATP For
example; during the last step of glycolysis, an
enzyme transfers phosphate group from
phosphoenol pyruvic (PEP) acid to ADP. As
a result, ADP becomes ATP and PEP is
changed into pyruvic acid. Substrate-level
phosphorylation accounts for only a small
percentage of the ATP that a cell generates.
This reaction can be shown as:
[IMAGE OF CHEMICAL REACTION]
Q47. How many ATP are obtained from
aerobic oxidation of glucose?
Ans. In aerobic oxidation of glucose 38
molecules of ATPs are obtained. However, 2
ATP molecules are consumed in NADPH
transfer therefore net profit of aerobic
oxidation of glucose is 36 ATP

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                 [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 6 ---
Q48. Which organic molecules act as fuel
for cellular respiration?
Ans. Free glucose molecules are not
common in out diet. Rather, we consume
sucrose and other disaccharides, starch, fats
and proteins. Proteins may also be used as
fuel but they must be digested to their
constituent amino acids. Typically, a cell
uses most of the amino acids to make its own
proteins.
Lipids are excellent cellular fuel because they
contain many carbon-hydrogen bonds. They
are first hydrolysed into glycerol and fatty
acids. Glycerol is converted to
giyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, an intermediate
in glycolysis, while the fatty acids are
changed into acetyl CoA. In this way both the
fatty acids and the glycerol enter cellular
respiration.
Photorespiration
★Q49. What is significance of C-4
photosynthesis?
Ans. In C-4 photosynthesis, the energy
cost for making a glucose molecule is almost
double. However, in hot climates, in which
photorespiration would otherwise remove
more than half of the carbon fixed, It is best
compromise available.
Q50. Define Photorespiration?
Ans. It is respiratory activity that occurs in
green cells in the presence of light resulting
in release of CO2.

Q51. Under which circumstances
photorespiration occurs?
Ans. When relative concentration of CO2
decreases and there is more oxygen in leaf
cells, rubisco adds O2 in RuBP instead of
CO2. It results in the break down of RuBP into
two molecules i.e., one phosphoglycerate and
one phosphoglycolate (2-C).
Q52. What is Rubisco? Give its function.
Ans. Rubisco is an enzyme, which is most
abundant protein on earth.
It combines 3 molecules of CO2 with 3
molecules of five carbon sugar named
ribulose bisphosphate to form six molecules
of a three carbon compound called 3-
phosphoglyceric acid.
Q53. How many organelles are involved
in photorespiration?
Ans. Following these organelles are
involved in photorespiration.
1. Chloroplast 2. Peroxisome
3. Mitochondria
Q54. Give names of C-4 plants and CAM
plants?
Ans. 1. C-4 plants: corn, sugarcane and
sorghum.
2. CAM-plants: Cacti, pineapple, etc.
Q55. Why Calvin cycle is also known C-
3 pathway?
Ans. Since the product of initial carbon
fixation is a three-carbon compound, the
calvin cycle is also known as C-3 pathway.

LONG QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)
Q1. What are photosynthetic pigments
and what role they play in the absorption
and conversion of light energy?
Ans. See Q4. of theory.
Q2. How are the absorption spectra of
chlorophyll ‘a’ and ‘b’ different?
Ans. See Q5. of theory.
Q3. Describe and illustrate how
photosynthetic pigments are organized in
thylakoid membrane?
Ans. See Q6. of theory.
Q4. Describe how the role of water in
photosynthesis can be explained through
experiment.
Ans. See Q3. of theory.

--- Page 7 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q5. What are the events that capture
light and convert it into chemical energy
during light dependent reactions?
Ans. See Q8. of theory.
Q6. Illustrate the cyclic
photophosphorylation.
Ans. See Q9. of theory.
Q7. Describe light independent
reactions of photosynthesis in terms of
paragraph and illustrate in terms of
Calvin cycle.
Ans. See Q10. of theory.
Q8. What happens with glucose in
anaerobic respiration and how different
organisms modify the end products?
Ans. See Q12. of theory.
Q9. How is glucose broken down to
pyruvic acid in glycolysis?
Ans. See Q14. of theory.

Q10. Describe how Krebs cycle is the
completion of the oxidation of glycolytic
products.
Ans. See Q16. of theory.
Q11. Explain the passage of electron
through electron transport chain.
Ans. See Q17 of theory.
Q12. Define chemiosmosis. How would
you relate it with electron transport chain?
Ans. See Q17. of theory.
Q13. Through which ways proteins and
fats enter cellular respiration?
Ans. See Q21. of theory.
Q14. Define photorespiration and
present it in proving that “photosynthesis
is not perfect”.
Ans. See Q22. of theory.
Q15. What are the effects of temperature
on the oxidative activity of Rubisco?
Ans. See Q22. of theory.
Q16. How is the process of C4
photosynthesis an adaptation to deal with
the problem of photorespiration?
Ans. See Q23. of theory.

INQUISITIVE QUESTIONS
Q1. Why does cellular respiration release energy more efficiently than
fermentation?
Ans. Because in cellular respiration there in complete breakdown of glucose into CO2 and
H2O while in fermentation there is incomplete breakdown of glucose.
Q2. Why is the conversion of glucose into ATP during cellular respiration
considered a more efficient use of energy than burning glucose directly?
Ans. The conversion of glucose into ATP during cellular respiration considered a more
efficient use of energy than burning glucose directly, because cellular respiration is an
enzyme-controlled process. So, most of energy released in not wasted but converted into ATPs
for use by the cell.
Q3. Why might a disruption in either photosynthesis or respiration processes
affect global carbon and oxygen cycles?
Ans. During photosynthesis CO2 is used and oxygen released while during respiration
oxygen is used and CO2 released so both processes play role in maintaining the CO2 and O2
levels in atmosphere. Any disruption in their processes can cause imbalance of their
concentration in atmosphere. Hence resulting in environmental pollution.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch6 Short Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [28/36]: 11th Bio New Ch7 Long Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 7: Structural and Computational Biology

Long Questions

DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONS

APPLICATIONS OF STRUCTURAL BIOLOGY

Q1. Define structural biology, describe its applications.
Ans. Definition: Structural biology deals with the study of three dimensional (3D)
structures of macromolecules (including proteins and
nucleic acids) at atomic levels.
Importance: It provides the detailed information about
the structure of biomolecule, its functions, dynamics
and interaction with ligands and other
macromolecules.
Applications of structural biology: Structural biology
has a wide range of applications especially in the field
of medical research. Some of these are discussed here.
1. Determining the Active sites and Domains
Structural biologists can determine the three-
dimensional (3D) structures of macromolecules such
as proteins and nucleic acids. The 3D structures reveal
the exact location, shape, and environment of the active
sites and different domains (distinct structural units
with independent functions) of macromolecules.
Example
For example, structural studies of the enzyme HIV-1
reverse transcriptase have identified its polymerase
domain (which synthesizes DNA).
RNase H domain (which breaks down the RNA strand of
RNA-DNA hybrids).
Significance
• Knowing the location and structure of these domains
has helped in the design of antiviral drugs that
specifically target them.
• Similarly, the structure of serine proteases
★ Note: All questions and paragraphs marked with a star ★ are explanations of the Box
Information provided in the textbook.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
reveals its well-defined active site, which is responsible for breaking down peptide
bonds.
2. Identifying Drug Targets: Structural biology helps scientists find the right place on a
disease-causing molecule where a drug can work. These places are usually proteins and are
called drug targets. By studying the 3D shape of these proteins, scientists can find specific
spots where a drug can attach and stop the protein form working.
Example
For example in COVID-19, scientists used structural biology to study the spike protein of
the coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). This protein helps the virus to enter human cells.
Significance
By knowing its 3D structure, scientists identified it as a drug target. Thus, they designed
vaccines and medicines that block the spike protein, preventing the virus from infecting
more cells.
3. Identifying Host-Pathogen Interactions
Structural biology also helps in understanding how pathogens (like viruses or bacteria)
interact with the host's body cells. This is
called host-pathogen interaction.
By studying the 3D structures of both the
pathogen and the host cell proteins, scientists
can see how the pathogen attaches to and
enters the host cell, and which molecules are
involved in the process.
Example
For example, structural biologists studied the
spike protein of coronavirus, which sticks
out from the surface of the virus. They also
looked at a protein on human cells that acts as
receptor of virus spike protein. So, the
scientists discovered exactly how the virus
enters human cells.
Significance
This information was vital in developing the
drugs that can bind with receptor proteins.
Such drug inhibits the interaction of the virus
with the receptor and consequently blocks the
entry of virus into the host cells.
4. Identifying Protein Misfolding
The functionality of proteins depends on the correct folding into three dimensional shapes.
Several diseases (including cyctic fibrosis, Parkinsons, Alziemer's) originate due to
incorrect folding of proteins. Structural biology provides understanding of intricate folding
pathways and how misfolding leads to the diseases.

--- Page 3 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

X-RAY CRYSTALLOGRAPHY
Q2. Write a note on principle and working of x-ray crystallography.
Ans. Discovery: X-ray crystallography was developed in 1912 by William Henry Bragg
and William Lawrence Bragg. They were awarded 1915 Nobel Prize in Physics for their
work. Since then it has been used to analyse the diverse substances including minerals,
salts, metals, proteins, carbohydrates, nucleic acids and vitamins.
Principle
In this technique, x-rays beam strikes crystal atoms and molecules in the crystals diffract
the x-rays beam in specific directions. From the angles and intensities of diffracted beams, a
3D picture of electron density within the crystals are produced. The electron density is
exploited to create 3D structure of the molecule.
Working of X-ray Crystallography
In order to understand the working of X-ray crystallography. Let us take the example of
protein structure determination. The method can be divided into following steps.
(i) Protein Crystallization
Protein crystallization means
turning a purified protein into
a solid crystal form. Crystals
are needed because they
arrange protein molecules in a
regular, repeating pattern,
which is important for getting
a clear image during the X-ray
process. To make crystals,
scientists slowly mix the
protein with special solutions
that cause the protein
molecules to stick together in
an orderly way. This process
can take hours, days, or even
weeks. It often requires careful
control of temperature, pH,
and salt concentration. Once a clear and stable protein crystal is formed, it can be used in
the next steps.
(ii) Production of a diffraction pattern: Once a good quality crystal is formed, it is
mounted on the x-ray machine. The x-rays beam is bombarded at the crystal at various
angles. The atoms in the crystal diffract the x-rays beam and a diffraction pattern (which is a
series of spots) is created on the detectors.
(iii) Creating density map: The angles and intensities of these spots contain information
about the arrangement of atoms in the crystal. Diffraction pattern is used to make a density
map.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 4 ---
(iv) Determination of protein structure: Then the data is analyzed mathematically by
using computational programs. These calculations transform data into the 3D structure of
protein.

COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY

Q3. Define computational biology. Describe its major areas and applications.
Ans. Definition
Computational biology is an interdisciplinary field that uses computational techniques and
tools to solve biological problems. It integrates knowledge from biology, computer
science, mathematics, and statistics to analyze and interpret biological data.
Importance of Computational Biology
The importance of computational biology lies in its ability to handle large datasets, uncover
hidden patterns, and generate predictive models that can lead to new biological insights and
applications.
Major areas
In the computational biology include:
(i) Genomics is the study of genomes, which are the complete set of DNA within a single
cell of an organism. Genomics involves sequencing, assembling, and analyzing the
function and structure of genomes. It helps in understanding genetic variations, gene
function, and evolutionary relationships.
(ii) Proteomics is the large-scale study of proteins, including their structures and functions.
Proteins are essential molecules that perform many functions within organisms.
Proteomics aims to map the entire set of proteins (the proteome) produced by an organism
and understand their interactions and roles in cellular processes.
(iii) Bioinformatics is the application of computer technology to manage and analyze
biological data. Bioinformatics tools and techniques are used to store, retrieve, and analyze
DNA, RNA, and protein sequences.
Applications of Computational Biology
Though computation biology has vast application, some of these are discussed here.
(i) Drug Discovery: Computational biology helps in identifying potential drug targets and
simulating the effects of drugs on biological systems. It accelerates the drug discovery
process by predicting how drugs interact with proteins and other molecules.
(ii) Genetic Research: By analyzing DNA sequences, computational biology helps identify
genetic variations associated with diseases. It aids in understanding the genetic basis of
diseases and can lead to the development of personalized medicine.
(iii)Evolutionary Biology: Computational tools are used to compare genetic information
across different species, helping to reconstruct evolutionary relationships and understand the
process of evolution.

--- Page 5 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q4. What are databases in biology? Briefly describe key databases of
computational biology.
Ans. Databases: In biology, databases are organized collections of biological data,
including genetic sequences, metabolic pathways, protein structure and other related
information.
Key Databases: Here are some of the key databases used to analyze nucleic acid and
proteins.
1. GenBank:
It is a comprehensive public database of nucleotide sequences and supporting
bibliographic and biological annotations. It provides access to a vast repository of DNA
sequences from various organisms, facilitating genetic research and comparative genomics.
GenBank:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/

[IMAGE]

Fig: Screenshot of GenBank database
2. Protein Data Bank (PDB)
This database provides 3D structural data of large biological molecules, such as proteins
and nucleic acids. It is important for studying the structures of macromolecules,
understanding their functions, and designing drugs that target specific protein structures.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 6 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

https://www.rcsb.org
☆ 
- 
WorldWide PDB 
- 
Muhammad Abra... 
- 
source: Pustipan 
- 
MPRAT 
- 
rated: 
- 
https www... 
- 
document... 
- 
ADMIRE 
- 
Greg - ndia 
- 
RCSB PDB 
Deposit 
Search 
Visualize 
Analyze 
Download 
Learn 
About 
Documentation 
Careers 
COVID-19 
RCSB 
PROTEIN DATA BANK 
222,624 Structures from the PDB 
1,068,577 Computed Structure 
Models (CSM) 
- 3D Structures 
Enter search terms. Entry ID, DOI or sequence 
Include CSM 
Advanced Search Browse Annotations 
The-101 
PDB 
EMDataResource 
NAKB 
newPDB 
PDB-Dev 
f y D in 
Access Computed Structure Models (CSMs) of available model organisms 
Learn more 
Deposit 
Search 
Visualize 
Analyze 
Download 
Learn 
RCSB Protein Data Bank (RCSB PDB) enables breakthroughs in 
science and education by providing access and tools for exploration, 
visualization, and analysis of 
Experimentally-determined 3D structures from the Protein Data 
Bank (PDB) archive 
ModelsArchive 
These data can be explored in context of molecular structures providing 
a structural view of biology 
Explore 
NEW 
Features 
PDB 
NEW 
PDB-101 
Training 
Resources 
July Molecule of the Month 
Ribosome Diversity 
Fig: Screenshot of protein databank 

3. Ensembl 
It is a genome browser providing information on genome sequences, gene models, and 
comparative genomics for various species. Ensembl helps to access and visualize genomic 
data, supporting studies in genomics and evolutionary biology. 
Q5. Describe some key algorithms being used in data analysis in biology. 
Ans. Algorithms: In biology, algorithm refers to a systematic and step by step 
computational procedure or set of rules designed to solve specific biological problems or to 
analyze data. 
Key Algorithms 
The following are the algorithms being in data analysis. 
1. BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool) 
• It is used for comparing primary biological sequence information, such as the amino- 
acid sequences of proteins or the nucleotides of DNA sequences. 
• It helps identify homologous sequences, predict functions of unknown genes, and study 
evolutionary relationships. 
2. FASTA: It is a sequence alignment tool that compares a query sequence to a database of 
sequences to find regions of similarity. It is used for searching protein and nucleotide 
databases, identifying sequence homology and analyzing sequence alignments. 

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 7 ---
SEQUENCE AND STRUCTURAL HOMOLOGY
Q6. What is sequence homology? Describe its categories and applications?
Ans. Sequence homology: Sequence homology refers to the similarity between DNA,
RNA, or protein sequences due to shared ancestry.
Categories of homologous sequences
Homologous sequences have evolved from a common ancestral sequence and can be
categorized into two main types:
i) Orthologs: Sequences in different species that originated from a common ancestral gene
during speciation. Orthologs often retain the same function across species.
ii) Paralogs: Sequences within the same species that originated from gene duplication.
Paralogs can evolve new functions even if they originally arise from the same ancestral
gene.
Gene duplication Speciation
Ancestral
Histone
H1 gene
Histone H1.1
Histone H1.2
Human
Chimpanzee
Human histone H1.1
Human histone H1.2
Chimpanzee histone H1.1
Chimpanzee histone H1.2
Fig: Types of Homologous Sequences
Applications of sequence homology
• Sequence homology provides an insight into the evolutionary relationships between
organisms.
• By comparing homologous sequences, scientists can infer the evolutionary history and
divergence of species.
• Sequence homology provides a clue about the function of an unknown gene or
protein. If an unknown gene/protein is homologous to a gene/protein with a known
function, it is likely to have a similar function.
• Identifying homologous genes involved in diseases across different species helps in
understanding disease mechanisms and developing treatments.
• Homologous genes in model organisms can be studied to gain insights into human
diseases.
Q7. Define structural Homology. Discuss how studying structural homology
benefits mankind.
Ans. Structural Homology
Structural homology refers to the similarity in the three-dimensional structures of
proteins or other macromolecules due to shared ancestry. Proteins with similar structures
often perform similar functions, even if their sequences are not highly similar.

--- Page 8 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Significance
• The three-dimensional structure of a protein provides critical information about its function.
• Understanding structural homology helps in predicting the function of newly discovered proteins.
• Structural homology is crucial in drug designing as drugs are often designed to interact with specific protein structures.
• Understanding the structural relationships between proteins can help in designing more effective drugs.
• Also studying the structural homology of proteins helps in understanding the evolutionary processes that shape protein functions and interactions.

Template Unknown Structure
Sequence Alignment
Computed Structure Model
Fig: Structural homology of
protein

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch7 Long Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [29/36]: 11th Bio New Ch7 MCQ's.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 7: Structural and Computational Biology

Multiple Choice Questions

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)

1. Generally, the function of a protein
depends on its:
(a) One-dimensional structure
(b) Two-dimensional structure
(c) Three-dimensional structure
(d) Four-dimensional structure
2. The protein domains are:
(a) Functional and structural units within
protein
(b) Secondary structural elements
(c) Linear sequences of amino acids
(d) Specific regions for post-translational
modification
3. The first step in x-ray crystallography
experiment is:
(a) Compute an electron density
(b) Build a model of your molecule
(c) Measure a diffraction pattern
(d) Grow a crystal
4. What is primary role of computational
biology?
(a) Using computer algorithms to
analyze data
(b) Identifying genetic mutations
(c) Studying protein functions
(d) Analyzing the expression patterns
5. Which computational approach is
used to predict protein structure
based on amino acid sequence?
(a) Multiple sequence alignment
(b) Homology modelling
(c) Clustering analysis
(d) BLAST searches

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
6. What is the primary focus of
structural biology?
(a) Studying metabolic pathways
(b) Determining 3D atomic level
structures of macromolecules
(c) Gene sequencing
(d) Gene expression
7. Which technique is used to determine
the 3D-structure of proteins?
(a) Electron microscopy
(b) Mass spectrometry
(c) Spectrometry
(d) X-ray crystallography
8. The active site of enzyme is important
in designing a drug, because:
(a) It determines enzyme physiology
(b) It is where a substrate binds
(c) It provides information about drug
(d) It is made up of lipids
9. How did structural biology contribute
to COVID-19 research?
(a) By measuring blood sugar level
(b) By sequencing the human genome
(c) By determining 3D structure of spike
protein
(d) By analyzing bacterial cell wall
10. The structural studies of enzyme HIV-L
reverse transcriptase have identified its:
(a) Polymerase domain
(b) RNase H Domain
(c) Nuclease domain
(d) All of above
11. The place on a disease-causing
molecule where a drug can work are
called:
(a) Drug targets (b) Off targets
(c) Counter target (d) Active
12. Protein misfolding is associated with
which of the following diseases?
(a) Influenza (b) Hypertension
(c) Alzheimer's (d) Gout

13. The first step in x-ray crystallography
is:
(a) Protein crystallization
(b) Production of a diffraction pattern
(c) Creating density map
(d) Determination of protein structure
14. In x-ray diffraction technique, the
diffraction pattern is used to:
(a) Make good quality crystal
(b) Create a density map
(c) Make density gradient
(d) Diagnose disease

15. The field that uses computational tools
to analyze biological data is:
(a) Quantum physics
(b) Geography
(c) Geophysics
(d) Computational biology
16. Which of the following is not the area
in computational biology?
(a) Genomics (b) Proteomics
(c) Ergonomics (d) Bioinformatics
17. Sequencing, assembling and analyzing
the function and structure of genomes
is studied in:
(a) Bioinformatics (b) Proteomics
(c) Structural biology (d) Genomics
18. Mapping the entire set of proteins
produced by an organism and to
understand their interactions and roles
in cellular process, is achieved in:
(a) Proteomics (b) Bioinformatics
(c) Genomics (d) Biodynamics
19. Which field of biology helps in
identifying genetic variations associated
with diseases?
(a) Structural biology
(b) Social biology
(c) Computational biology
(d) biomathematics

--- Page 3 ---
20. “https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccor
e/” is a link for:
(a) GenBank (b) EmBL
(c) PDP (d) DDBJ
21. Which database stores 3D structures
of macromolecules?
(a) Ensembl (b) PDB
(c) GenBank (d) BLAST
22. The database of nucleotide sequences
and supporting bibliographic
annotations is:
(a) GenBank (b) FASTA
(c) BLAST (d) PDB
23. A genome browser providing
information on genome sequences,
gene models and comparative
genomics for various species is:
(a) FASTA (b) GenBank
(c) BLAST (d) Ensembl
24. Which one of the following is a
sequence alignment tool that
compares a query sequence to a
database of sequences?
(a) BLAST (b) FASTA
(c) EMBL (d) PDB
25. A researcher wants to search protein
and nucleotide databases to identify
sequence homology, which one is most
appropriate to study?
(a) FASTA (b) GenBank
(c) Swiss port (d) UniPort KB
Sequence Homology
26. What is sequence homology?
(a) Similarity in sequences due to shared
ancestry
(b) 3D-structure of proteins due to
shared ancestry
(c) Large-scale study of proteins
(d) None of above
27. Orthologs are:
(a) Genes in same species
(b) Human histone H1.1 and H1.2
(c) Sequences in different species
(d) Arise from same ancestral gene

28. Human histone H1.1 and Human
histone H1.2 are:
(a) Paralog (b) Ortholog
(c) Metalog (d) both (a) and (b)
29. Human histone H1.1 and Chimpanzee
histone H1.1 are:
(a) Paralog (b) Metalog
(c) Ortholog (d) Algorithm
30. How does structural homology helps
in drug designing?
(a) By identifying similar protein
structures for targeted drug binding
(b) By identifying homologous genes
(c) By providing an insight into
evolutionary relationships of genes
(d) By gene sequencing
31. If two proteins have structural
homology what can be inferred:
(a) They likely share functional
similarities
(b) They have identical DNA sequences
(c) They share orthologs
(d) Does not give clue about unknown
gene
32. The tool used for sequence alignment
in bioinformatics:
(a) PDB (b) FASTA
(c) GenBank (d) Ensembl
33. Which bioinformatics tools acts like a
‘Google Search’ for DNA sequences?
(a) Photoshop (b) Excel
(c) BLAST (d) PDB
34. The biologists compare protein
structures to unknown genes?
(a) To assign possible functions
(b) To study novel proteins
(c) To discover drugs
(d) To make an act

--- Page 4 ---
35. Identify the missing step in X-ray
crystallography:
1. Crystalize protein → 2. X-ray
diffraction 3 → ? → 4. 3D model
(a) Calculate electron density maps
(b) Calculate charge of electrons
(c) Homogenization
(d) Protein fractionation
36. A researcher is studying a newly
discovered protein, linked to a rare
disease. The protein's sequence shows
no match in BLAST, the next possible
step is:
(a) Modify protein sequence
(b) Check for structural homology using
PDB
(c) Reanalyze the protein structure
(d) Go for x-ray crystallography

37. Orthology differ from paralogs in:
(a) Orthologs arise from speciation
paralogs from gene duplication
(b) Orthologs arise from gene
duplication and paralogs from
speciation
(c) Orthologs have identical genetic
sequences
(d) Both (a) and (c)
38. The limitation of homology modeling
is:
(a) Depends on protein function
(b) Only specific for carbohydrates
(c) Requires a template structure with
maximum similarities
(d) None of above

ANSWER KEY
1. c 2. a 3. d 4. a 5. b 6. b 7. d
8. b 9. c 10. d 11. a 12. c 13. a 14. b
15. d 16. c 17. d 18. a 19. c 20. a 21. b
22. a 23. d 24. b 25. a 26. a 27. c 28. a
29. c 30. a 31. a 32. b 33. c 34. a 35. a
36. b 37. a 38. c

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch7 MCQ's.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [30/36]: 11th Bio New Ch7 Short Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 7: Structural and Computational Biology

Short Questions

SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS EXERCISE

Q1. Define domains of the protein.

Ans. The distinct structural units with
independent functions, within a protein are
called its domains.
Example: HIV-1 reverse transcriptase have
its polymerase domain which synthesizes
DNA, this domain has been identified by
structural biologists.

Q2. How corona virus enters the host
cells?

Ans. The corona virus (SARS-CoV-2)
possess spikes in its envelope. These spikes
are made up of proteins known as spike
proteins, which stick out from the surface of
the virus. There is a protein on human cells
that acts as receptor (Cd-4) of virus spike
protein. When spike protein attach with
receptor protein of human cells (helper T-
lymphocytes), it gets entry into host cells.

Q3. Define genomics.

Ans. Genomics is one of the major areas
in computational biology, which involves
the study of genomes, which are the
complete set of DNA within a single cell of
an organism. It also involves sequencing, all
assembling and analyzing the function and
structure of genome.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
Q4. Differentiate between genomics and proteomics.
Genomics
• Genomics i.e., the study of genomes,
which are the complete set of DNA
within a single cell of an organism.
• Genomics involves sequencing,
assembling, and analyzing the function
and structure of genomes. It helps in
understanding genetic variations, gene
function, and evolutionary relationships.

Proteomics
• Proteomics i.e., the large-scale study of
proteins, including their structures and
functions.
• Proteomics aims to map the entire set of
proteins (the proteome) produced by an
organism and understand their interactions
and roles in cellular processes.

Q5. What is GenBank. Describe it
briefly.
Ans. It is a comprehensive public
database of nucleotide sequences and
supporting bibliographic and biological
annotations. It provides access to a vast
repository of DNA sequences from various
organisms, facilitating genetic research and
comparative genomics.

Q6. Write a short note on Protein Data
Bank.
Ans. Protein Data Bank (PDB)
This database provides 3D structural data of
large biological molecules, such as proteins
and nucleic acids. It is important for
studying the structures of macromolecules,
understanding their functions, and designing
drugs that target specific protein structures.

SLO BASED SHORT QUESTION ANSWERS
Application of Structural Biology
Q7. Define structural biology. What
information it provides about?
Ans. Structural biology deals with the
study of three dimensional (3D) structures
of macromolecules (including proteins and
nucleic acids) at atomic levels.
• It provides the detailed information about
the structure of biomolecule, its functions,
dynamics and interaction with ligands and
other macromolecules.
Q8. Enlist the applications of
structural biology in the field of medical
research.
Ans. Applications in Medical Research
1. Determining the active site and domains
of macromolecules.
2. Identifying drug targets for developing
vaccines or medicines.
3. Identification of Host-pathogen
interactions.
4. Identification of protein misfolding to
diagnose diseases.
Q9. What is the significance of
knowing the location and structure of
domains of macromolecules?
Ans. Knowing the location and structure
of domains of macromolecules helps in
designing of antiviral drugs that can
specifically target them.
Q10. What are drug targets? Give
example satisfying the role of structural
biology in designing vaccines and
medicines.
Ans. Drug Targets
Structural biology helps scientists find the
right place on a disease-causing molecule
where a drug can work. These places are
usually proteins and are called drug targets.

--- Page 3 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

• By studying the 3D shape of these
proteins, scientists can find specific spots
where a drug can attach and stop the
protein from working.
For example, in COVID-19, scientists used
structural biology to study the spike protein
of the coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). This
protein helps the virus to enter human cells.
• By knowing its 3D structure, scientists
identified it as a drug target. Thus, they
designed vaccines and medicines that
block the spike protein, preventing the
virus from infecting more cells.
Q11. How studying 3D-structures of
host-pathogen/s helps in the development
of drugs to prevent this interaction?

Ans. Host-Pathogen Interactions
• Structural biology helps in understanding
how pathogens (like viruses or bacteria)
interact with the host's body cells. This is
called host-pathogen interaction.
Significance: By studying the 3D structures
of both the pathogen and the host cell
proteins, scientists can see how the pathogen
attaches to and enters the host cell, and
which molecules are involved in the process.
For example, structural biologists studied
the spike protein of coronavirus, which
sticks out from the surface of the virus. They
also looked at a protein on human cells that
acts as receptor of virus spike protein.
• So, the scientists discovered exactly how
the virus enters human cells. This
information was vital in developing the
drugs that can bind with receptor proteins.
Such drug inhibits the interaction of the
virus with the receptor and consequently
blocks the entry of virus into the host
cells.

Q12. Describe the role of structural
biology in identifying diseases due to
protein misfolding?
Ans. The functionality of proteins depends
on the correct folding into three dimensional
shapes.
• Several diseases originate due to incorrect
folding of proteins, including cyctic
fibrosis, Parkinson's, Alziemer's.
• Structural biology provides understanding
of intricate folding pathways and how
misfolding leads to the diseases.
X-ray crystallography
Q13. Who discovered x-ray
crystallography? Describe its purpose of
discovery.
Ans. X-Ray Crystallography
• X-ray crystallography was developed in
1912 by William Henry Bragg and
William Lawerence Bragg.
• They were awarded 1915 Nobel Prize in
Physics for their work.
• Since then it has been used to analyze the
diverse substances including minerals,
salts, metals, proteins, carbohydrates,
nucleic acids and vitamins.
Q14. Describe the working principle of
x-ray crystallography.
Ans. In this technique, x-rays beam strikes
crystal atoms and molecules in the crystals
diffract the x-rays beam in specific
directions. From the angles and intensities of
diffracted beams, a 3D picture of electron
density within the crystals are produced. The
electron density is exploited to create 3D
structure of the molecule.
Q15. Enlist the steps involved in
working of x-ray crystallography.
Ans. In order to understand the working of
x-ray crystallography its method is divided
into following steps.
1. Protein crystallization
2. Production of diffraction pattern

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 4 ---
3. Creating density map.
4. Determination of protein structure.
Q16. Draw the schematic representation
of x-ray crystallography.
[IMAGE]
Fig: Schematic representation of X-ray
crystallography
Q17. Describe how proteins are
crystallized in x-ray crystallography?
Ans. Protein Crystallization
• Protein crystallization means turning a
purified protein into a solid crystal form.
Crystals are needed because they arrange
protein molecules in a regular,
repeating pattern, which is important for
getting a clear image during the x-ray
process.
• To make crystals, scientists slowly mix
the protein with special solutions that
cause the protein molecules to stick
together in an orderly way.
• This process can take hours, days, or even
weeks. It often requires careful control of
temperature, pH and salt concentration.
Once a clear and stable protein crystal is
formed, it can be used in the next steps.
Q18. How a diffraction pattern is
produced in x-ray crystallography?

Ans. Production of a diffraction pattern
Once a good quality crystal is formed, it is
mounted on the x-ray machine. The x-rays
beam is bombarded at the crystal at various
angles. The atoms in the crystal diffract the
x-rays beam and a diffraction pattern (which
is a series of spots) is created on the
detectors.
Computational Biology
Q19. Define computational biology
describe its importance.
Ans. Computational Biology
Computational biology is an
interdisciplinary field that uses
computational techniques and tools to solve
biological problems. It integrates knowledge
from biology, computer science,
mathematics and statistics to analyze and
interpret biological data. The importance of
computational biology lies in its ability to
handle large datasets, uncover hidden
patterns and generate predictive models that
can lead to new biological insights and
applications.
Q20. Name major areas in
computational biology, describe
bioinformatics.
Ans. Major areas of computational
biology include: Proteins, genomics, bio-
informatics.
Bioinformatics: Bioinformatics i.e., the
application of computer technology to
manage and analyze biological data.
Bioinformatics tools and techniques are used
to store, retrieve and analyze DNA, RNA
and protein sequences.
Q21. Write two applications of
computational biology.
Ans. Applications of Computational
Biology
Computational biology has vast
applications, some of these are discussed
here.
(i) Drug Discovery: Computational
biology helps in identifying potential drug
targets and simulating the effects of drugs
on biological systems. It accelerates the drug

--- Page 5 ---
discovery process by predicting how drugs
interact with proteins and other molecules.
(ii) Genetic Research: By analyzing DNA
sequences, computational biology helps to
identify genetic variations associated with
diseases. It aids in understanding the genetic
basis of diseases and can lead to the
development of personalized medicine.
Q23. Differentiate between BLAST and FASTA.
Q22. Name key databases used in
computational biology.
1. GenBank
2. Protein Data Bank (PDB)
3. Ensembl

BLAST
• It is used for comparing primary
biological sequence information, such as
the amino-acid sequences of proteins or
the nucleotides of DNA sequences.
• It helps identify homologous sequences,
predict functions of unknown genes and
study evolutionary relationships.

Q24. What do you know about
Ensembl?
Ans. Ensembl
It is a genome browser providing
information on genome sequences, gene
FASTA
• It is a sequence alignment tool that
compares a query sequence to a database
of sequences to find regions of similarity.
• It is used for searching protein and
nucleotide databases, identifying sequence
homology and analyzing sequence
alignments.
models and comparative genomics for
various species. Ensembl helps to access and
visualize genomic data, supporting studies in
genomics and evolutionary biology.

Sequence Homology
Q25. Differentiate between sequence homology and structure homology.
Sequence Homology
Sequence homology refers to the
similarity between DNA, RNA or protein
sequences due to shared ancestry.
Homologous sequences have evolved from
a common ancestral sequence.
Structure Homology
Structural homology refers to the similarity
in the three-dimensional structures of
proteins or other macromolecules due to
shared ancestry. Proteins with similar
structures often perform similar functions,
even if their sequences are not highly
similar.

Q26. Categorize sequence homology.
Ans. Sequence homology is categorized
into two main types.
Orthologs: Sequences in different species
that originated from a common ancestral
gene during speciation. Orthologs often
retain the same function across species.
Example: Human histone H1.1, human
histone H1.2 and chimpanzee histone H1.1.
Paralogs: Sequences within the same
species that originated from gene
duplication. Paralogs can evolve new
functions even if they originally arise from
the same ancestral gene e.g., Human histone
H1.1 and human histone H1.2.

--- Page 6 ---
Q27. Describe applications of sequence
homology study.
Ans. Sequence of homology study
• Sequence homology provides an insight
into the evolutionary relationships
between organisms.
• By comparing homologous sequences
scientists can infer the evolutionary
history and divergence of species.
• Sequence homology provides a clue about
the function of an unknown gene or
protein. If an unknown gene/protein is
homologous to a gene/protein with a
known function, it is likely to have a
similar function.
• Identifying homologous genes involved in
diseases across different species helps in
understanding disease mechanisms and
developing treatments.
• Homologous genes in model organisms
can be studied to gain insights into
human diseases.
Q28. Write some significances of
studying structural homology.
Ans. Understanding structural homology
helps in predicting the function of newly
discovered proteins. Furthermore, structural
homology is crucial in drug designing, as
drugs are often designed to interact with
specific protein structures. Understanding
the structural relationships between proteins
can help in designing more effective drugs.
Also studying the structural homology of
proteins help in understanding the
evolutionary processes that shape protein
functions and interactions.

LONG QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)
Q1. Describe the applications of
structural biology.
Ans. See Q1. of theory.
Q2. Write a note on principle and
working of x-ray crystallography.
Ans. See Q2. of theory.
Q3. Briefly describe key databases of
computational biology.
Ans. See Q4. of theory.

INQUISITIVE QUESTIONS
Q1. Consider there is a pandemic of a new unknown disease, and the
causative agent in a virus. You also know that virus belongs to X family. How
structural biology can be helpful in preventing the disease?
Ans. Structural biology is pivotal in understanding viral out breaks. For a new virus from
the X-family, following steps can be taken to prevent the disease from Novel virus;
1. Use X-ray crystallography to determine the 3D-structure of viral surface proteins (e.g
spike proteins)
2. Identify how viral proteins interact with human cell receptor proteins. (e.g., ACE2 for
SARS-CoV-2)
3. Locate conserved domains to design inhibitors.
4. Develop drugs that block the viral entry (e.g., by binding to spike proteins)
5. Use structural data to engineer mRNA vaccines.
This is how structural biology can be helpful in preventing that pandemic.

--- Page 7 ---
Q2. Suppose you find an unknown protein and determine amino acid
sequence by Edman degradation/mass spectrometry. How can you exploit the
computational biology to predict the structure and function of the protein?
1. First of all, use BLAST to compare the amino acid sequence against GenBank or Protein
Data Bank for homologs.
2. Then go for sequence homology, which will provide clue about the function of unknown
protein.
3. If the unknown protein is homologous to a protein with known function, it is likely to
have a similar function.
4. Finally use structural homology, the 3D structure of protein provides critical information
about its function because proteins with similarity/similar in structures often perform
similar functions.
Q3. Homology models of macromolecules differ from experimentally
determined structures of the mpacromolecules. Please comment.
Ans. The homology models are basically approximations, while experimental structures
reveal atomic levels, because homologous models are predicted from templates in database,
while experimentally determined structures of macromolecules are derived from empirical
data (e.g., x-ray crystallography) in which x-ray beam is bombarded in specific direction on
crystals, from angles and intensities of diffracted beams, a 3D picture of electron density
within crystals are produced which is exploited to create 3D-structure of molecule, that
gives a real image rather than homology models.
Q4. Draw a flow chart to describe the steps involved in drug development till
its prescription.
Determine the 3D
structure of
macromolecule such as
protein of pathogen
Identify domains
and active sites
of
macromolecule
Identify the drug targets by
finding the right place on a
disease-causing molecule
where drug can work.
Go for trial of lab animals
Design vaccines or medicine
that can block the target.
If results support in favour of
blocking the entry of blocking
the entry of pathogen by using
drug
Human trials
Market availability

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch7 Short Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [31/36]: 11th Bio New Ch8 Long Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 8: Plant Physiology

Long Questions

DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONS

NUTRITION IN PLANTS

Q1. Define nutrient. Give detail of macronutrients regarding their role in
plants. Also mention the effect of their deficiencies.
Ans. All autotrophic organisms need carbon dioxide and water, which supply carbon,
oxygen and hydrogen. These are predominant elements which serve as nutrients and are
required by plants for the synthesis of organic molecules. There are many other nutrients that
plants get from environment.
★ Fertilizers are added to the solid to provide macro and micronutrients to the crops.
Macronutrients
The type of nutrients which are needed in relatively larger amounts for growth and
development. There are nine macronutrients i.e., carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen,
potassium, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium and sulphur.
Explanation
• Carbon, oxygen and hydrogen are required for making organic compounds.
• Nitrogen is necessary for plant growth as it plays an essential role in energy metabolism
and the production of proteins.
• Deficiency of nitrogen: A deficiency of nitrogen results in leaf loss and stunted growth
(remain small in size).
• Phosphorus: Phosphorus is a part of ATP It also plays a role in promoting root growth
and favours flowering in the aerial zone.
• Deficiency of Phosphorus: A deficiency of phosphorus leads to delayed flowering, as
well as the browning and wrinkling of the leaves.
• Potassium is involved in water regulation and the transportation of the plant's
photosynthesis, reinforces cellular tissue and stimulates the uptake of nitrates.
• Deficiency of potassium: Dark patches are formed on the leaves when there is shortage
of potassium.
• Calcium provides stability to the cell wall and promotes the development of the cell wall.
It also plays a role in cellular proliferation and maturation and aiding in the development
of seeds.
• Insufficient calcium leads to the development of yellow and brown patches on the
leaves.
★ Note: All questions and paragraphs marked with a star ★ are explanations of the Box
Information provided in the textbook.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
• Magnesium constitutes the core of the chlorophyll molecule and is therefore essential for
photosynthesis. It promotes the absorption and transportation of phosphorus and also
contributes to the storage of sugars within the plant.
• Magnesium deficiencies result in weak stalks, loss of greenness in the oldest leaves and
the appearance of yellow and brown spots.
• Sulfur is a fundamental element in the metabolism of nitrogen.
• Deficiency of sulfur: If there is a shortage of sulfur, the plant becomes lighter in colour.
Q2. Define micronutrients. Illustrate the role of elements crucial for the growth
of plants.
Ans. “The nutrient which are needed in relatively very smaller amounts to meet the needs
of growth processes are called micronutrients”. There are seven micronutrients i.e., iron,
manganese, zinc, molybdenum, copper, chlorine and boron.
• Iron is essential for the synthesis of chlorophyll. It acts as a cofactor for several enzymes
which are involved in energy transfer and nitrogen metabolism.
• Deficiency: Its deficiency results in interveinal chlorosis (yellowing).
• Manganese is involved in the processes of photosynthesis, nitrogen metabolism,
carbohydrate metabolism and activation of enzymes.
• Deficiency: Its deficiency results in the premature falling of the leaf and delayed
maturity.
★ Manganese is important of the activity of antioxidant enzymes, such as superoxide
dismutase (SOD), which help mitigate oxidative stress in plants under adverse
environmental conditions.
• Zinc facilitates chlorophyll synthesis, root development and uptake of nutrients.
• Deficiency of zinc can lead to stunted growth.
• Molybdenum is critical of nitrogen fixation, nitrogen reduction, sulfur metabolism,
phosphorus metabolism and iron utilization.
• Deficiency: Its deficiency can result in chlorosis of older leaves and stunted growth.
• Copper is necessary for lignin synthesis providing strength and rigidity to cell wall. It is
involved in nitrogen metabolism, reproductive development and also acts as a cofactor for
enzymes.
• Deficiency: Its deficiency can result in chlorosis, twisted leaves and stunted growth.
• Chlorine is involved in stomatal regulation, osmotic adjustment and transport of nutrients.
• Deficiency: Its deficiency can affect the health and growth of plants.
Q3. How does nutrient absorption from insects benefit insectivorous plants in
nutrient-poor soils?
Ans. Nutrition in Insectivorous Plants
Some plants supplement organic molecule into their food in addition to inorganic nutrients.
These organic chemicals are acquired by capturing and breaking down insects and tiny
animals such plants are called insectivorous plants. All insectivorous plants are true
autotrophs. However, their development accelerates when they capture prey. Apparently,

--- Page 3 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

nitrogenous compounds of animal body are of benefit to these plants. The captured insects are
broken down by enzymes that are released by the leaves. Pitcher plant, venus fly trap and
sundew are some of the known insectivorous plants.

Fig: Pitcher plant, insects are entrapped within the leaf
Pitcher plant (Sarracenia purpurea): Pitcher plant has leaves modified into a sac or a
pitcher, partly filled with water. The leaf's terminal portion is altered to create a hood, which
partially covers the exposed opening of the pitcher. It has numerous stiff hairs that prevent
little insects from crawling out once they fall inside it.
Venus-fly trap (Dionaea muscipula): Venus-fly trap has a "trap" consisting of two lobes that
are hinged at the end of each leaf. The inner surfaces of the lobes contain trichomes which are
hair-like projections that trigger the lobes to close rapidly upon contact with prey. The hinged
traps are lined with fine bristles that interlock upon closure, preventing the prey from escaping.
The trapped insect is then digested by the enzymes secreted from the glands on the leaf surface
and the products are then absorbed.

Fig: Venus-fly trap, prey is trapped between the lobes of a leaf
Sundew (Drosera intermedia) catches its prey with shiny drops of "dew", where the plant's
common name comes from. The leaves are covered with tiny hairs that look like tentacles.
Each leaf has gland and has a single drop of dew at the tip. The insects, attracted by plant's
odour are trapped by tentacles. The trapped insects are digested by enzymes and products are
absorbed.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 4 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Fig: Sundew, insects are entangled by the tentacles
GAS EXCHANGE IN PLANTS
Q4. Describe opening and closing of stomata as per starch-sugar hypothesis.
Ans. The opening of stomata is primarily regulated by guard cells. At night, when
photosynthesis ceases due to lack of light, stomata typically close to conserve water. However,
plants still respire taking in O2 and releasing CO2. The closure of stomata at night helps
minimize water loss through transpiration.
Multisensory Hydraulic valves
The guard cells function as multisensory hydraulic valves. Guard cells functions as
multisensory hydraulic values as they open and close in response of certain environmental
factors like light, CO2 and humidity. The two hypotheses which may explain the opening and
closing of stomata are strach sugar hypothesis and influx of K+ ion.
Starch sugar hypothesis
In 1856, German botanist H. Van Mohl proposed that guard cells in leaf epidermis are solely
responsible for photosynthesis, producing sugars during the day. As sugar concentration
increases in guard cells, the water potential drops. Water moves into guard cells causing them
to become turgid and open the stomata. At night, photosynthesis ceases and sugars are
converted to insoluble starch or used for respiration, leading to a decline in free sugars.
Consequently, water move out of guard cells and they lose turgor pressure. So, they become
flaccid and close the stomata. However, this mechanism does not fully explain the rapid turgor
changes in guard cells during stomatal movements.
Q5. Explain influx of K+ ion in regulation of opening and closing of stomata.
How does abscisic acid overrides the effect of light and CO2 in stomatal
movement?
Ans. Influx of K+ ion
According to this hypothesis the opening of stomata in plants is facilitated by the active
transport of potassium ions (K+) into guard cells, which reduces their osmotic potential. This
influx of K+ leads to water entering the guard cells through osmosis, causing them to become
turgid and open the stomata.
Role of blue light: Blue light enhances this process by acidifying the surrounding
environment, promoting K+ uptake and subsequent water absorption. At night, K+ passively

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 5 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

diffuses out of the guard cells, resulting in water loss and causing the guard cells to become
flaccid, thereby closing the stomata.
★ Hormonal Involvement
Hormones are involved in stomatal movement in plants. At high temperature when leaf cells
start wilting, a hormone called abscisic acid, is released by mesophyll cells. This hormone
stops the active transport of K+ into guard cells, overriding the effect of light and CO2
concentration. So, K+ pumping stops and stomata close.

SUPPORT IN PLANTS
Q6. What is palisade tissue? Give its structure and role in photosynthesis.

Ans. Palisade tissue is primarily located just beneath the upper epidermis of the leaf. It
consists of elongated, tightly packed cells that are rich in. The arrangement of these cells is
organized to maximize light absorption and allowing plants to efficiently convert light energy
into chemical energy.
Carbon dioxide from the atmosphere diffuses into the leaf through the stomata. Once inside,
the gas travels through air spaces within the spongy mesophyll and then into the palisade
mesophyll cells, where it is used in photosynthesis. Oxygen produced during photosynthesis
diffuses out of the palisade cells back through the spongy mesophyll and exists the leaf
through the stomata.

[Image of leaf cross-section with labels: Cuticle, Upper epidermis, Palisade, Mesophyll, Spongy, Lower epidermis, Air space, Guard cell, Stoma]

Fig: Structure of a leaf showing cuticle, epidermis, palisade mesophyll, spongy mesophyll,
guard cells and stomata.
Q7. Elaborate the role of different types of supporting tissues in plants.

Ans. Supporting tissues in Plants
Supporting tissues play an important role in maintaining the structural integrity, support
and flexibility of plants. These tissues consist of parenchyma, collenchyma, sclerenchyma,
xylem and phloem.
1. Parenchyma: The parenchyma tissue provides support to herbaceous plants and parts of
larger plants. The parenchyma cells of the epidermis, cortex and pith absorb water. This water
creates an internal hydrostatic pressure known as turgor pressure that maintains the rigidity of
cells.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 6 ---
Role of Turgor Pressure: Turgor pressure arises from the elevated osmotic pressure within
the cell vacuole. The membrane that surrounds the vacuole is called the tonoplast. It has many
active transport mechanisms that move ions into the vacuole, even the elevated ionic
concentration, water is drawn into the vacuole, resulting in turgidity and providing mechanical
support to the plant's soft tissues.
2. Collenchyma: Collenchyma cells are specialized cells that are grouped in the form of
strands or cylinders. They are found beneath the epidermis of young stems, leaf stalks and
along veins in leaves. Collenchyma cells lack secondary walls. Their primary walls are
thickened at the corners, due to extra deposition of cellulose. They elongate when stem or leaf
grown lengthwise. They provide support to the young parts of plant in which secondary
growth has not taken place.
3. Sclerenchyma: This tissue provides structural support to the plants. Typically, the cells of
sclerenchyma tissue possess thick secondary cell walls. These walls are saturated with lignin,
an organic compound that gives strength and rigidity to the walls. The majority of
sclerenchyma cells are non-living. The main function of this tissue is to provide support to the
various components of the plant.

(a) Parenchyma
Middle
lamella
Intercelluler
space
Primary cell
wall
Sap vacuole
Nucleus
Cytoplasm

(b) Collenchyma
TS
Thickened pectin
and cellulose cell walls
LS

(c) Sclerenchyma fibres
Single fibre
Simple
pit
TS
Simple pit
Lingnified
cell wall

(d) Sclerenchyma sclereids
Lumen
Lingnified
cell wall
Branched
pit

Fig: Specialized plant cells; (a) Parenchyma (b) Collenchyma (c) Sclerenchyma

Types: There are three types of sclerenchyma cells which are fibres, sclereids and vessels.
(i) Fiber (Tracheids) are elongated and cylindrical in shape. They can be found either as
compact bundles inside the xylem or as bundle caps.
(ii) Sclereids are smaller in size as compared to fibers and are present in the seed coats and
shells of nuts. Their function is to offer protection.
(iii) Vessels (Tracheae) are long tubular structures that are joined end to end to form a long
water conducting pipe in xylem.

--- Page 7 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

                                 WATER POTENTIAL
Q8. What is water potential? Describe the effects of solute and atmospheric
pressure on water potential?
Ans. Water Potential (Ψw)
Water molecules possess kinetic energy which means that in liquid or gaseous form they
move about rapidly and randomly from one place to another. So, greater the concentration of
the water molecules in a system the greater is the total kinetic energy of water molecules. This
is called water potential (symbolized by Greek letter Psi =Ψw).
Pure water has maximum water potential which by definition is zero. Water moves from a
region of higher Ψw to lower Ψw. All solutions have lower Ψw than pure water and so have
negative value of Ψw (at atmospheric pressure and at a defined temperature). So the osmosis
can be defined as the movement of water molecules from a region of higher water potential to
a region of lower water potential through a partially permeable membrane.
Factors that determine water potential
In plant cells, two factors determine water potential i.e., Solute potential (Ψs) and Pressure
potential (Ψp).
1. Solute Potential (Ψs)
The solute potential or osmotic potential is a measure off the change in water potential (Ψw)
of a system due to the presence of solute molecules. Ψs is always a negative value, so if more
solute molecules are present, lower (more negative) is the Ψs.
2. Pressure Potential (Ψp)
It is the part of water potential which is due to the pressure exerted by water. If pressure greater
than atmospheric pressure is applied to pure water or a solution, its water potential increases.
When water enters plant cells by osmosis, pressure may be build up inside the cell making the
cell turgid and increasing the pressure potential.
Thus, the total water potential (Ψw) is sum of solute potential (Ψs) and pressure potential (Ψp):
Ψw =Ψs +Ψp
If we use the term water potential, the tendency for water to move between any two systems
can be measured; not just from cell to cell in a plant but also from soil to root, from leaf to air
and from soil to air. The steeper the potential gradient the faster is the flow of water along it.
                          TRANSPORT OF WATER IN PLANTS
Q9. Which pathways are followed by water to reach xylem from soil?
Ans. Uptake of Water by Roots
Roots of plants provide large surface area for absorption by their extensive branching systems.
Roots have tiny root hairs, which are actually extensions of epidermal cells of roots. Most
of the uptake of water and minerals in roots takes place through root hairs.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 8 ---
From soil, water and minerals enter the root epidermal cells by active and passive transport.
From root epidermis, they move to cortex and then into the xylem tissue in the centre of root.
Pathways: Inside roots, water and minerals move in three different pathways to reach the
xylem.
1. The Apoplast Pathway
It is a continuous pathway that involves a system of adjacent cell walls in the plant roots. The
apoplast pathway becomes discontinuous in the endodermis in the roots due to the presence
of Casparian segments.
2. The Symplast Pathway
In symplast pathway, water and minerals move through interconnected protoplasts of root
cells. The protoplasts of neighbouring cells are interconnected through plasmodesmata
which are cytoplasmic strands that extend through pores in adjacent cell walls. The symplast
pathway is less important, except for minerals in the region of endodermis.

Plasmodesmata Tonoplast
[Image of cells with arrows]
Vacuole Cell wall Cytoplasm
apoplast pathway Symplast pathway Vacuolar pathway
Fig: Water movement through apoplast, symplast and vacuolar pathways

3. The Vacuolar Pathway
In Vacuolar pathway, water and minerals move through cell membranes, cytoplasm and
tonoplast (membranes of vacuoles) and vacuoles. They move from vacuole to vacuole and
bypass the symplast and apoplast pathways. Movement in vacuolar pathway is negligible.
Q10. Explain the key structural components of xylem tissue.
Ans. Structure of Xylem Tissue
Xylem is the vascular tissue in plants that
carries water and dissolved minerals (sap)
from the roots to the stem and leaves. It is
also a key structural component which
provides mechanical support to the plant
body.
Composition
Xylem comprises of tracheids, vessels,
xylem fibres and xylem parenchyma.
a. Tracheids are elongate and thin cells
that have thick walls made of lignin. The
ends of the cells are tapered and they are
linked to each other by bordered pits,

[Image of xylem components]
Fig: Different components of xylem tissue

--- Page 9 ---
which enable the lateral movement of water between cells.
b. Vessels are shorter and broader compared to tracheids. They are arranged in a linear
fashion, forming continuous channels. Perforation plates are present at the outer edges
of these structures, enabling efficient movement of water.
c. Xylem fibres are elongated cells with thickened lignified walls. At maturity, they are dead
and enhance the structural integrity of the xylem. They offer additional structural
support to the plant.
d. Xylem parenchyma are living cells with thin walls that have the ability to retain and hold
nutrients and water. Xylem parenchyma cells participate in the lateral translocation of
water and nutrients and can also contribute to the healing and regeneration of xylem tissue.
Q11. Explain the TACT mechanism of water flow from root to leaf?
Ans.
The movement of water within plants, from roots to leaves, occurs primarily through
specialized vascular tissue known as xylem.
TACT: The TACT (Transpiration, Adhesion, Cohesion, Tension) also called cohesion –
tension theory is a widely accepted model explaining how water moves against gravity
through the xylem to reach all parts of the plant. This mechanism depends on both physical
and chemical properties of water and the plant's interaction with its environment.
Components of TACT mechanism
1. Transpiration
Transpiration is the process by
which water evaporates from
the surface of plant leaves,
specifically through stomata.
As water vapour exits the leaf,
a negative pressure is
generated within the leaf
tissue. This negative pressure
creates a pulling force, drawing
water upward from the roots
through the stem and towards
the leaves. Transpiration,
therefore, acts as the primary
driving force behind water
transport in the xylem.
2. Adhesion: Adhesion is the
attraction between water
molecules and the walls of
the xylem vessels. Due to
this attraction, water
molecules stick to the walls of xylem vessels as they move upward. This property prevents
any break in the water column within xylem. Adhesion thus plays a crucial role in maintaining

--- Page 10 ---
the continuity of the water column, especially in tall plants where gravity exerts a significant
downward force on the water column.
3. Cohesion: Cohesion refers to the attractive force between water molecules themselves,
caused by hydrogen bonding. Water molecules within the xylem stick together, forming an
unbroken column from the roots to the leaves. This cohesive property of water ensures that
the "pull" initiated by transpiration at the leaf level extends down through the entire water
column.
4. Tension: Tension is the negative pressure created by the pulling force of the transpiration
at the leaf level. As water evaporates from the leaf surface, it creates a low-pressure area that
extends through the xylem. This tension pulls the cohesive water column upwards. Tension is
therefore vital for the continuous ascent of water within the xylem.
TRANSLOCATION OF FOOD IN PLANTS
Q12. Describe the structural composition of phloem.
Ans. Structure of Phloem
Phloem is a vascular tissue in plants responsible for the transport of organic nutrients,
particularly the products of photosynthesis, from the leaves to other parts of the plant where
they are needed or stored. The phloem is generally found on the outer side of both primary
and secondary vascular tissue in plants with secondary growth. The phloem constitutes the
inner bark.
Components: Phloem comprises of sieve elements, companion cells, phloem fibres and
phloem parenchyma.
1. Sieve Tube Elements or Cells: The
cells of phloem that transport sugars and
other organic material throughout the
plant are called sieve tube elements or
cells. Sieve tube elements have 'sieve
areas', which are the portions of the cell
where pores interconnect the sieve tube
elements.
Sieve Tube: Some of the sieve areas are
generally formed in end walls of sieve
tube elements where the individual cells
are joined together to form a longitudinal
series called a sieve tube.
2. Companion cells: Each sieve tube
element is associated with one or more companion cells. Sieve tube elements and companion
cells are in communication with each other by plasmodesmata. Companion cells supply ATP
and proteins to sieve tube elements as they lack nucleus.
3. Phloem parenchyma: Phloem parenchyma stores substances, such as sugars, resins, latex
and mucilage which are important for plant defence and moisture retention.
4. Phloem fibers: Phloem fibres are specialized sclerenchyma cell, which are elongated,
spindle shaped have thick walls. These are crucial in providing mechanical support and
strength to plant.

--- Page 11 ---
Q13. Explain mass flow hypothesis for the transport of sugars?
Ans. Mechanism of Translocation of sugars
The transport of sugars in plants takes place through phloem tissue. Passive theories of phloem
transport include:
1. Diffusion is far too slow, to account for the velocities of sugar movement in phloem,
which on the average is 1 meter per hour, while the rate of diffusion is 1 meter per eight
years.
2. Pressure flow theory: The pressure-flow theory, also known as the mass-flow
hypothesis, is the most widely accepted explanation for the transport of sugars in plants
through the phloem. This process of translocation moves sugar from the source (where
they are synthesized) to the sink (where they are consumed or stored). This theory was
proposed by Ernst Munch in 1930. This theory relies on the principle of osmotic pressure
differences between source and sink regions.
Steps: Following steps explain the pressure-flow theory:

Xylem phloem
higher
hydrostatic
pressure
3
osmosis
bulk flow
of solution
lower
hydrostatic
pressure
companion cell
leaf
(source of sucrose)
plasmodesmata
sieve tube
companion cell fruit (sink for sucrose)
water osmosis
sucrose active transport of sucrose
Fig: The pressure flow theory

1. The glucose formed during photosynthesis in mesophyll cells, is used in respiration. The
excess of glucose is converted into non-reducing sugar i.e., sucrose.
2. Sucrose is actively transported from mesophyll cells to the companion cells of phloem.
From here, sucrose diffuses to sieve tubes, through plasmodesmata. So, the concentration
of sucrose in sieve tubes increases.
3. Due to higher sucrose (solute) concentration in sieve tubes, water moves into them by
osmosis from the nearby xylem of leaf. It results in an increase in the water potential at
the source end of sieve tubes.

--- Page 12 ---
4. At the sink end, sugar is actively unloaded from sieve tubes and water also follows by
osmosis. The exit of water lowers the water potential at the sink end. So, there is a higher
water potential at the source end while a lower water potential at the sink end.
5. The difference in water potential causes water to flow from source to sink. Since sucrose
is dissolved in water, it is carried along from source to sink along with water.

GROWTH IN PLANTS

Q14. What are growing points in plants? Explain the types of meristem and their
role in growth. / What is the role of meristem in growth of plants?
Ans. Growth in Plants
Growth in plants refers to a permanent increase in size, which can occur in various
dimensions such as height, width and mass. Throughout life, the plant adds organs such as
branches, leaves and roots. Its organs increase in size from the tips but the rate of growth is
not uniform throughout the body.
Growing points: In lower plants, the entire plant body is capable of growing, but in higher
plants, growth is limited to certain regions known as growing points.
These growing points consist of groups of cells, called meristems that are capable of
continuous cell division.
Types of Meristems
There are three types of meristems in plants that accounts for growth in plants. i.e., apical
meristem, intercalary meristem and lateral meristem.
1. Apical meristems are found at
the tips of roots and shoots. They
are primarily responsible for the
extension of the plant body.
These are perpetual growth
(continuous growth) zones found
and are responsible for the
increase in the number of cells at
the tips of roots and stems. They
play an important role in
primary growth.
2. Intercalary meristems are
separated from the apex by
permanent tissues. They are
situated at the bases of
internodes in many plants such
as grasses and play an important
role in the production of leaves and flower. These are temporary.
3. Lateral meristems are cylinders of dividing cells present along the peripheral regions.
They are responsible for growth in thickness of stems and roots. They are found in woody
plants and are crucial for secondary growth. There are two main forms of lateral
meristems; vascular cambium and cork cambium.

--- Page 13 ---
• Vascular cambium is located between the xylem and phloem and is responsible for the
production of secondary xylem and secondary phloem.
• Cork cambium is formed in the outer layer of stems and roots. This tissue produces cork
cells which replace the epidermis and forms the outer protective bark.
Q15. Define primary growth in plants? Describe the phases of primary growth
in plants?
Ans. Primary Growth
Primary growth is responsible for an increase in the length of the plants. It is facilitated by
the activity of apical meristems. Herbaceous plants generally display primary growth with
little secondary growth as compared to woody plants.
Phases: The process of primary growth in plants occurs in three phases.
1. Cell Division: The cells of apical meristems
undergo mitotic division and the number of
cells is increased. It happens at the tips of
apical meristems of root and shoot. The area
of apical meristem where cell division
occurs, is called zone of cell division. In this
zone, cells are non-vacuolated and small.
These cells have spherical nuclei in the
centre of cytoplasm.
2. Cell Elongation: After the formation of new
cells, their volume increases due to uptake of
water. Plasticity of cell wall increases and
wall pressure is reduced. It happens at a little
distance from the tips of apical meristems.
The area where cell elongation occurs, is
called zone of cell elongation. In this zone,
cells are vacuolated and large. They have
nuclei in the peripheries of cytoplasm.
During this phase, different cells elongate in
different dimensions and the final size of
cells is attained. For example, the cells which are determined to develop into pith, cortex
etc. do not elongate much length-wise while the cells which are determined to develop
into xylem tissue elongate more length-wise.
3. Cell Differentiation: After the cells have got their final size and shape, elongation stops
and cells are specialized to perform specific functions. Their cell walls become thicker
and many new structural features develop. It happens in the area next to the zone of
elongation. In this zone, cells are fully differentiated and each type of cell performs
specific function.

--- Page 14 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q16. Define secondary growth in plants. Describe the significance of secondary
growth in plants? / Describe the changes associated with change in season from
spring to autumn in cambium?
Ans. Secondary Growth
Secondary growth refers to the increase in thickness or girth of stems and roots. It is due to
the activity of lateral meristems, specifically the vascular cambium and cork cambium. It is
more prominent in woody perennial plants, while herbaceous plants show only primary
growth.
Explanation                                                                    heartwood   Pith
The cells of vascular cambium divide                                 sapwood
and produce new cells on both of its
outer and inner margins. Cells
produced on outer margins of vascular                                                                    Radial surface
cambium make secondary phloem                                                                            Transverse
while the cells produced on its inner growth rings                                                       surface
margins make secondary xylem.
Secondary tissues (particularly
secondary xylem) cause increase in Inner bark
plant's thickness. Division in cork Outer bark                                                          Tangential
cambium produces cells on both outer                                                                     surface
and inner sides. These cells make new
cork. The region of mature stem
outside of the vascular cambium,                      Fig: Anatomy of a tree trunk showing annual
which contains secondary phloem,                                          rings
cork cambium and cork, is collectively called bark.
Annual Rings: Annual rings are formed due to the seasonal activity of the cambium layer in
trees. This process is influenced by environmental factors and results in the production of two
distinct types of wood each year spring wood (early wood) and autumn wood (late wood).
These rings provide valuable information about the age of the tree and the environmental
conditions experienced during each growing season.
• Cambium: The cambium is a meristematic tissue that generates new vascular tissues i.e.,
xylem and phloem.
• Growth in spring: In spring, when conditions are favourable, the cambium is highly
active, producing a large volume of xylem with wider vessels, resulting in lighter-coloured
spring wood.
• Growth in autumn: As the season changes to autumn, the cambium's activity
decreases. It produces fewer xylem elements, which are narrower and denser, leading to
the formation of darker autumn wood. The combination of spring wood and autumn
wood forms a complete annual ring. Each year, a new ring is added, allowing for the
determination of a tree's age through dendrochronology.
The transition between these two types of wood is gradual from spring to autumn, but the shift
from autumn back to spring in the following year is abrupt, marking a clear distinction
between the growth periods. This data is valuable for studying long-term climate variability
and changes.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                    [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 15 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

PLANT GROWTH REGULATORS
Q17. What are plant growth regulators? Compare and contrast the roles of
auxins and gibberellins in plant growth.
Ans. Plant Growth Regulators
Plants regulate the rates of growth and the rate of metabolism in their cells. Special chemical
messengers, called plant growth regulators or plant hormones regulate their growth. There
are five major groups of plant growth regulators i.e., auxins, cytokinins, gibberellins,
abscisic acid and ethylene.
Auxins
• These are indole acetic acid (IAA) or its
variants.
• In stem, promote cell enlargement in
region behind apex.
• Promote cell division in cambium.
• In root, promote growth at very low
concentrations. Inhibit growth at higher
concentrations, e.g., geotropism. Promote
growth of roots from cuttings and calluses.
• Promote bud initiation in shoots but
sometimes antagonistic to cytokinins and
is inhibitory.
• Promote apical dominance and fruit
growth. They can sometimes induce
parthenocarpy.
• Cause delay in leaf senescence (aging) in
a few species.
• Inhibit abscission.
Gibberellin
• Gibberellins are produced in the apical
portions of roots and shoots, and
transported to other parts. Gibberellins
contain Gibberellic acid and there are
more than 110 different gibberellins.
• Promote cell enlargement in the presence
of auxins. Also promote cell division in
apical meristem and cambium.
• Promote ‘bolting’ of some rosette plants.
• Promote bud initiation in shoots of
chrysanthemum callus.
• Promote leaf growth and fruit growth.
May induce parthenocarpy.
• In apical dominance, enhance action of
auxins.
• Break bud and seed dormancy.
• Sometimes may substitute for red light.
Therefore, promote flowering in long-
day plants, while inhibit in short day
plants.
• Cause delay in leaf senescence in a few
species.
Q18. Cytokinins are one of the most important plant growth regulators,
comment.
Ans. Cytokinins
They are usually produced in roots, young fruits and in seeds. Cytokinins promote cytokinesis
during cell division. They increase the rate of DNA replication and the rate of RNA and
protein synthesis.
Functions: They perform the following:
• Promote stem growth by cell division in apical meristem and cambium.
• Inhibit primary root growth.
• Promote lateral root growth.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 16 ---
• Promote bud initiation and leaf growth.
• Promote fruit growth but can rarely induce parthenocarpy.
• Promote lateral bud growth, also break bud dormancy.
• Cause delay in leaf senescence.
• Promote stomatal opening.
Q19. What are the domains of actions of Abscisic acid and ethylene as growth
regulators in plants? / How Abscisic acid and ethylene effect plant growth during
physiological stress?
Ans. Abscisic acid
Abscisic acid (ABA) is synthesized mainly in mature green leaves, fruits and root caps.
Functions: It performs the following functions:
• Inhibits stem and root growth notably during physiological stress, e.g., drought and
waterlogging.
• Promotes bud and seed dormancy.
• Promotes flowering in short day plants and inhibits in long day plants (antagonistic to
gibberellins).
• Sometimes promotes leaf senescence.
• Promotes abscission.
• Promotes closing of stomata under conditions of water stress (wilting).
Ethylene
It is a natural product of the metabolism of plants. Inhibits stem growth, notably during
physiological stress.
Functions: It performs the following functions:
• Inhibits root growth.
• Breaks dormancy of bud.
• Promotes flowering in pineapple.
• Promotes fruit ripening.
OSMOREGULATION IN PLANTS
Q20. Define osmoregulation. Write the effects of various types of solutions on
cells.
Ans. Osmoregulation in Plants
Osmoregulation refers to the process by which an organism maintains a stable internal
equilibrium of water and dissolved substances, irrespective of the surrounding environmental
conditions.
Many marine organisms undergo osmosis without the requirement for regulatory systems
since their cells have the same osmotic pressure as that of the sea.
However, some organisms must actively acquire, retain or eliminate water or salts in order to
regulate their internal water and mineral balance.

--- Page 17 ---
Types of Solutions and their effect on living cells
1. Hypotonic solution: A solution having reduced solute concentration relative to the
intracellular environment of a cell. As a result, water enters the cell by osmosis resulting
in the swelling.

In hypertonic conditions:
Plasmolyzed
In isotonic conditions:
Flaccid
In hypotonic conditions:
Turgid
Fig: Effect of Hypertonic, Hypotonic and isotonic solution to plant cell

2. Hypertonic solution: A solution having high solute concentration relative to the
intracellular environment of a cell. As a result, water moves out of the cell which causes
the cell to shrink due to loss of water, a condition called plasmolysis.
3. Isotonic solution: A solution whose solute concentration resembles to the intracellular
environment of the cell. Net movement of water between the cell and its environment is
zero in this case leaving no effect on size or shape of the cell.
Q21. Describe osmoregulation in hydrophytes and mesophytes?
Ans. Osmotic Adjustments in Plants
Plants are distributed in different habitats of aquatic, moderate, severely dry terrestrial and
saline nature, thus termed as hydrophytes, mesophytes, xerophytes and halophytes,
respectively.
1. Hydrophytes are adapted to aquatic environments, including marine and freshwater
ecosystems, though specialized osmotic adjustment mechanism, these are of two types.
• Marine hydrophytes thrive in saline (hypertonic) conditions, where water tends to leave
their solutes like proline, glycine, betaine and sugars to retain water by increasing their
internal osmotic potential. The have thick cuticles which further reduce water loss, and
they exhibit halophytic traits to tolerate high salinity e.g., seaweeds, seagrass, mangroves.
• Freshwater hydrophytes grow in hypotonic environments, where water continuously
enters their cells. These plants expel excess water through structures like hydathodes or
vacuoles to avoid overhydration (over flooding). They actively absorb essential ions, such
as potassium and calcium to maintain osmotic balance and compensate for the dilute
surroundings. With thin or absent cuticles, these plants facilitate water exchange and often
have reduced root systems relying on direct nutrient and water absorption form their
environment. Examples of hydrophytes are water lilies, lotus and tape grass.
2. Mesophytes live in moderate environments that are neither too dry nor too wet:
• They prefer soil that is not waterlogged and has a moderate salt content and humidity.
• Mesophytes have well-developed roots and shoots with a fully formed vascular system.
• They do not require any special adaptations to survive.
• Their leaves are flat, broad and green with stomata on the surface.
• Examples of mesophytes include rose, tomatoes and daisies.

--- Page 18 ---
Q22. How does xerophytes and halophytes are adapted to live in dry conditions
and high salt concentrations respectively?
Ans.
1. Xerophytes are plants that are adapted to
survive in dry conditions.
Adaptations: They have special adaptations
to minimize water loss and store water. Plants
that store water are known as succulents.
• They possess fleshy stems that can store
water and used when needed.
• Xerophytes include waxy coatings on
leaves to reduce water loss, leaf dropping
during dry periods and leaf folding or
repositioning to absorb sunlight
efficiently. Examples of xerophytes
include thorn trees, desert marigold,
cacti and blue agave.
Fig: A xerophytic plant (cactus)
2. Halophytes: Halophytes are the plants which inhabit saline soil with high concentration of
salts like NaCl, MgCl2, MgSO4 or saline water. On such a substratum, only those plants can
grow which can tolerate a relatively high concentration of these salts.
Adaptations
• These plants have succulent leaves and sometimes the stem is also succulent.
• In certain cases, leaves are modified into spines.
• Examples of halophytes are sea arrowgrass and sea lavender.
THERMOREGULATION IN PLANTS
Q23. Describe the Physiological adaptation of plants to extreme conditions. How
do plants adjust their cell membrane composition and protein structures to
survive high and low temperatures?
Ans. Thermoregulation in Plants
Thermoregulation is a homeostatic mechanism in which organisms maintain their internal
body temperature despite variations in environmental temperature.
1. High Temperature
High temperature denatures the enzymes and damages the metabolism. Plants use evaporative
cooling to cope with high temperature.
• Hot and dry weather, however, causes water deficiency resulting in closing of stomata, thus
plants suffer in such conditions.
• Most plants have adapted to survive in heat stress as the plants of temperate regions face.
the stress of 40°C and higher temperature. The cells of these plants synthesize large
quantities of special proteins called heat-shock proteins. These proteins embrace
enzymes and other proteins thus help to prevent their denaturation.
2. Low Temperature
i. Non – Freezing Temperature: Low temperature, alters the fluidity of the cell membrane,
because lipids of the membrane become locked into crystalline structures, which affects the
transport of the solutes. The structure of the membrane proteins is also affected.

--- Page 19 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

• Adaptations: Plants respond to cold stress by increasing proportion of unsaturated fatty
acids, which help membrane to maintain structure at low temperature by preventing
crystal formation. This adaptation requires time. Because of this reason, rapid chilling of
plants is more stressful than gradual drop in air temperature.
ii. Freezing temperature
Freezing temperature causes ice crystal formation. The confinement of ice formation around
cell wall does not affect as badly and plants survive. However, formation of ice crystals within
protoplasm perforates membranes and organelles hence killing the cells.
• Adaptations: The plants native to cold region such as oaks, maples, roses and other
plants have adapted to bring changes in solutes composition of the cells, which causes
cytosol to super cool without ice formation, although ice crystals may form in the cell
walls.

MOVEMENTS IN PLANTS
Q24. What are tropic movements in plants? Explain major types of movements
in plants?
Ans. Tropic movements
The growth movements in plants that are triggered due to an external stimulus, are
collectively called tropic movements or tropisms. Such movements occur as a curvature of
whole organ towards or away from stimuli such as light, touch, chemical, water and gravity.
Types: Following are the major types of tropic movements in plants:
1. Phototropism: It is the movement of part of plant, in response to stimulus of light and
is caused by the differential growth of part of a plant like stem or root. The tips of shoots
usually show positive phototropism while roots show negative phototropism.
2. Geotropism: It is the movement of plant parts in response to gravity. Roots display
positive geotropism and shoots negative geotropism.
3. Thigmotropism: It is the movement in response to stimulus of touch, for example
climbing vines. When they come in contact with some solid object, the growth on the
opposite side of contact increases and the tendril coils around the support.
4. Chemotropism: The movement in plants in response to some chemicals is called
chemotropism. For example, the sugary environment on the stigma of a flower induces
pollen tube to grow inside the pistil/carpel to reach the ovule.

PHOTOPERIODISM
Q25. Define photoperiodism. Classify flowering plants according to
photoperiodism.
Ans. Photoperiodism
The response to changes in day length that enables plants to adapt to seasonal changes in their
environment is termed as photoperiodism. Simply, it is response of plants to the length of
day and night.
Contribution of Garner and Allard
Effect of photoperiodism was first studied in 1920 by Garner and Allard. They studied that
tobacco plant flowers only after exposure to a series of short days. Tobacco plant naturally
flowers under same conditions, in autumn, but flowering could be induced by artificially
exposing to short days.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 20 ---
Classification on basis of effect of light period
With further studies they were able to classify flowering plants into long-day plants, which
require long days for flowering, short-day plants, which require short days for flowering and
day-neutral plants which flower without being influenced by photoperiod.
Effect of Dark Period
Later on, further studies indicated that it is really the length of the dark period which is
critical. Thus, short-day plants are really long-night plants. If they are grown in short days,
but the long night is interrupted by a short light period, flowering is prevented. Long-day
plants will flower in short days if the long night period is interrupted.
Classification of plants according to photoperiodic requirements for flowering with
examples.
| Short-day plants (SDPs) | Long-day plants (LDPs) | Day-neutral plants (DNPs) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Flowering induced by dark periods longer than a critical length, e.g., cocklebur 8.5h; tobacco 10-11h. | Flowering induced by dark periods shorter than a critical length, e.g., henbane 13h. | Flowering independent of photoperiod. |
| Examples include cocklebur (Xanthium), chrysanthemum, soyabeans, tobacco, strawberry. | Examples include henbane (Hyoscyamus niger), snapdragon, cabbage, spring, wheat, spring barley | Examples include cucumber, tomato, garden pea, maize, cotton. |

Q26. Explain the role of Phytochrome in flowering.
Ans. Role of Phytochrome in flowering: Phytochrome a photoreceptor protein exists in
two forms i.e., P660 and P730, P660 is a quiescent form. It absorbs red light at a wavelength of
660 nm and is converted to active P730 which absorbs far red light at 730 nm and is converted
to P660.
In nature, the P660 to P730 conversion takes place in day light and P730 to P660 conversion occurs
in the dark.
The rate at which P730 is converted to P660 provides the plant with a “clock” for measuring the
duration of darkness.
It has been found that red light inhibits flowering in short-day plants but promotes flowering
in long-day plants, under conditions during which flowering normally takes place.
This observation led to the hypothesis that the P730 to P660 interconversion might be the plant
time-regulator for flowering.
According to this hypothesis, P730, converted from P660 by the absorption of red light would
inhibit flowering in short day plants but promote flowering in long day plants.
Because P730 accumulates in the day and diminishes at night, short day plants could flower
only if the night were long enough, during which a great amount of P730 would not be
completely inactivated, so that enough P730 would remain at the end of night to promote
flowering.
But now it is generally agreed that the time measuring phenomenon of flowering is not totally
controlled by the interconversion of P660 to P730.
Role of Florigen in flowering
Other factors, like presence or absence of light and length of dark or light period also play an
important role in flowering. The biological clock once stimulated causes production of

--- Page 21 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

florigen hormone in leaves, which travels through phloem to the floral buds, initiating
flowering.

VERNALISATION
Q27. What is vernalisation? Describe its significance?
Ans. Vernalisation
The process of induction of flowering in plants by exposing them to certain low (chilling)
temperature is called vernalisation. It is usually effective in biennial and perennial plants.
Low Temperature
The low temperature stimulus is received by the shoot apex of a mature stem or embryo of
the seed but not by the leaves as in photoperiodism.
For some plants, vernalisation is an absolute requirement while in some cases it simply
assists in inducing flowering.
Duration: The duration of low temperature (chilling) treatment required varies from four
days to three months.
Temperature around 4°C is found to be very effective in this regard.
Significance
• It stimulates the production of a hormone “vernalin” which induces vernalisation.
• Photoperiodism and vernalisation serve to synchronise the reproductive behaviour of
plants with their environment, ensuring reproduction at favourable times of year.
• They also ensure that members of the same species flower at the same time, encouraging
cross pollination for genetic variability.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch8 Long Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [32/36]: 11th Bio New Ch8 MCQ's.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 8: Plant Physiology

Multiple Choice Questions

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)

1. Process by which water evaporates
   from surface of leaf primarily through
   stomata.
   (a) Transpiration (b) Guttation
   (c) Imbibition (d) Cohesion
2. Through which structure does most of
   transpiration occurs?
   (a) Root hairs (b) Phloem
   (c) Xylem (d) Stomata
3. The FACT theory primarily explains?

   (a) The movement of nutrients in the
   plants
   (b) The transport of water in plants
   (c) The absorption of minerals
   (d) The process of photosynthesis
4. Which of the following is not a function
   of xylem?
   (a) Transport of water
   (b) Transport of minerals
   (c) Transport of food
   (d) Mechanical support
5. Which of the following has a
   perforated cell wall?
   (a) Vessel (b) Fibre
   (c) Tracheid (d) Sclereid
6. Exposure to lower temperature
   stimulates the process of flowering in
   biennial or perennial plants:
   (a) Dormancy (b) Photoperiodism
   (c) Vernalization (d) All of above
7. Plants that are adapted to survive in
   dry conditions:
   (a) Xerophytes (b) Hydrophytes
   (c) Mesophytes (d) Halophytes
8. When sugar content in a cell increases
   the concentration of solute increases,
   what happens to the water potential?
   (a) Raises (b) Drops
   (c) Unchanged (d) None of these

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
9. In higher plant, transport of food
materials occurs through;
(a) Companion cells
(b) Sieve tubes
(c) Vessel elements
(d) Tracheids
10. The plant hormone which inhibits the
stem and root growth is
(a) Auxin
(b) Ethylene
(c) Cytokinins
(d) Gibberellin

11. The leaves of some hydrophytes float
on the surface of water. In such a leaf,
stomata are found in:
(a) Lower epidermis
(b) Upper epidermis
(c) Sides of leaf
(d) Deep depressions in leaf
12. Mesophytes are adapted to survive in:
(a) Moderate environments
(b) Dry conditions
(c) Water environments

SLO BASED MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS

Nutrition in Plants
13. Which of the following does not serve
as a source of energy?
(a) Water (b) Lipids
(c) Proteins (d) Carbohydrates
14. The collective processes involved in the
intake and utilization of nutrients for
growth, repair and maintenance of
activities in an organism is called:
(a) Excretion (b) Nutrition
(c) Reproduction (d) Digestion
15. The number of macronutrients in
plants are:
(a) 3 (b) 6
(c) 9 (d) 12
16. Which nutrient is a part of ATP and
plays role in promoting root growth
and favours flowering in the aerial
zone, is:
(a) Calcium (b) Magnesium
(c) Phosphorous (d) Sulfur
17. Deficiency of which nutrient leads to
delayed flowering, browning and
wrinkling of the leaves?
(a) Iron (b) Phosphorus
(c) Calcium (d) Magnesium
18. Dark patches are formed on the leaves
due to the deficiency of:
(a) Manganese (b) Sulfur
(c) Potassium (d) Nitrogen

19. Which of the following statements
describe the deficiency of calcium in
plants:
(a) Dark patches on leaves
(b) Plant becomes lighter in color
(c) Browning and wrinkling of leaves
(d) Development of yellow and brown
patches
20. The micronutrient which is critical for
nitrogen fixation, nitrogen reduction,
sulfur metabolism and iron utilization
is:
(a) Manganese (b) Zinc
(c) Copper (d) Molybdenum
21. Which of the following truly describes
copper as a nutrient?
(a) Necessary for lignin synthesis
(b) Act as cofactor for enzymes
(c) Its deficiency can result in chlorosis
twisted leaves and stunted growth
(d) All of the above
22. Leaves modified into a sac, partly filled
with water, numerous stiff hairs,
belongs to:
(a) Pitcher plant (b) Venus-fly trap
(c) Sundew (d) Cobra lilly

--- Page 3 ---
23. Venous fly trap has:
(a) Trap consisting two lobes having hinge
(b) Inner surfaces contain trichomes
(c) Fine, interlocking bristles
24. Which plant uses odour as a chemical weapon to attracts its prey?
(a) Sundew (b) Cobra lilly
(c) Pitcher plant (d) Rose
Gas Exchange in Plants
25. Who proposed that guard cells in leaf epidermis are solely responsible for photosynthesis?
(a) H. Van Mohl (b) Dixon
(c) F. Sanger (d) Van Neil
26. Which light enhances the process of opening of stomata by acidifying the surrounding environment, promoting K+ uptake is:
(a) Red light (b) Green light
(c) White light (d) Blue light
27. The hormone which over rides the effects of light and CO2 concentration in stomatal movement is:
(a) Auxins (b) Cytokinins
(c) Abscisic acid (d) Gibberellins
Support in Plants
28. The membrane of ____ is called tonoplast.
(a) Vacuole (b) Nucleus
(c) Lysosome (d) ER
29. The cells that are grouped in the form of strands and cylinders, lack secondary cell walls:
(a) Parenchyma (b) Sclerenchyma
(c) Collenchyma (d) Both (a) and (b)
30. Which of the following correctly describes the sclerenchyma tissue:
(a) Provides support to herbaceous plants
(b) Primary walls thickened at corners
(c) Thick secondary cell walls, saturated with lignin
(d) Both (a) and (b)

31. Which of the following does not belongs to sclerenchyma cells?
(a) Fibres (b) Sclereid
(c) Vessels (d) Parenchyma
Water Potential
32. Water potential is symbolized by Greek Letter psi=
(a) ψw (b) ψs
(c) ψa (d) ψp
33. Pure water has maximum water potential which by definition is:
(a) +1 (b) 0
(c) +1200kpa (d) -600kpa
34. Osmotic potential is also called:
(a) Water potential
(b) Solute potential
(c) Pressure potential
(d) Action potential
Transport of Water
35. The steeper the potential gradient the flow of water will be:
(a) Faster
(b) Slower
(c) Un/not affected
(d) Very slower
36. Which of the following cells are the extensions of epidermal cells?
(a) Tap roots (b) Lateral roots
(c) Root hairs (d) Adventitious roots
37. The pathway involving a system of adjacent cell-walls in plant roots for the transport of sap is called:
(a) Apoplast (b) Symplast
(c) Vacuolar (d) ETC
38. The cytoplasmic strands that extend through pores in adjacent cell walls of plants are:
(a) Plasmodesmata
(b) Stomata
(c) Lenticels
(d) All of the above

--- Page 4 ---
39. The pathway in which water and
minerals move via interconnected
protoplasts of root cells, is called:
(a) Apoplast (b) Symplast
(c) Vacuolar (d) Reticular
40. Casparian strips are hurdle in the way
of:
(a) Vacuolar pathway
(b) Symplast pathway
(c) Apoplast pathway
(d) None of above
41. Which cells does not comprise xylem
tissue?
(a) Sieve elements (b) Xylem fibres
(c) Tracheids (d) Vessels
42. Which feature belongs to vessels of
xylem:
(a) Elongate and thin cells
(b) Living cells with thin walls, hold
nutrients.
(c) Shorter, broader, perforation plates
43. The force which plays crucial role in
maintaining continuity of water
column during ascent of sap is:
(a) Adhesion (b) Cohesion
(c) Tension (d) Ionic bond
44. Water molecules within xylem stick
together forming an unbroken column
from roots to the leaves is due to:
(a) Adhesion (b) Cohesion
(c) Tension (d) Transduction
Translocation of Food
45. Which statement characterizes tension
in TACT theory.
(a) Negative pressure created by pulling
force for continuous flow of water
(b) Attractive force between water and
xylem walls
(c) Attractive force between water
molecules
(d) Both (a) and (c)

46. Phloem tissue compromises of:
(a) Companion cells
(b) Sieve elements
(c) Phloem fibres
47. The cells of phloem that transport
sugars throughout the plant are:
(a) Companion cells
(b) Fibres
(c) Phloem parenchyma
(d) Sieve tube cells
48. Companion cells supply________to
sieve tube elements.
(a) ATP and proteins
(b) Proteins and lipids
(c) Sugars and water
(d) Supply nothing
49. Sieve tube elements and companion
cells are in communication with each
other by:
(a) Vacuoles (b) Stomata
(c) Plasmodesmata(d) Gap junctions
50. Storage of sugars, resins, latex and
mucilage takes place in:
(a) Sieve tube cells
(b) Phloem fibres
(c) Phloem parenchyma
(d) Companion cells
51. The velocity of sugar movements in
phloem on average is:
(a) 1m/8years (b) 1m/sec
(c) 1cm/day (d) 1m/hour
52. Who proposed mass-flow hypothesis?
(a) Dixon (b) Van Mohl
(c) Van Neil (d) Ernst munch
53. The theory which relies on the
principle of osmotic pressure
differences between source and sink
regions is:
(a) Pressure-flow theory
(b) TACT
(c) Mass-flow hypothesis
(d) Both (a) and (c)

--- Page 5 ---
54. The excess glucose after respiratory
needs in plants is converted into non-
reducing sugar i.e.
(a) Malt sugar (b) Cane sugar
(c) Milk sugar (d) Lactose
Growth in Plants
55. The type of meristem found at the tips
of roots and shoots:
(a) Vascular cambium
(b) Apical meristem
(c) Lateral meristem
(d) Intercalary
56. The type of meristem separated from
the apex by permanent tissues, situated
at base of internodes is:
(a) Apical (b) Intercalary
(c) Lateral (d) Cork cambium
57. Which statement about lateral
meristem is correct:
(a) Cylinders of dividing cells along
peripheral regions
(b) Found in woody plants
(c) Crucial for secondary growth
58. Which statement describes cork
cambium:
(a) Formed in the outer layers of stem and
roots
(b) Produce cork cells and bark
(c) Present at the tips of roots
(d) Both (a) and (b)
59. Increase in the length of the plants is
called:
(a) Primary growth
(b) Secondary growth
(c) Tertiary growth
(d) Quaternary growth
60. The process of primary growth occurs
in ________ phases.
(a) 2 (b) 3
(c) 4 (d) 5

61. The phases of primary growth in
plants includes
(a) Cell division
(b) Cell elongation
(c) Cell differentiation
62. Non-vacuolated, small cells, spherical
nuclei in the centre of cytoplasm occurs
in
(a) Zone of cell division
(b) Zone of cell elongation
(c) Zone of cell maturation
(d) Zone of cell differentiation
63. Phase of cell elongation is
characterized by:
(a) Increase in cell volume due to
endosmosis
(b) Non-vacuolated cells
(c) Cells fully differentiated
(d) Each cell performs its specific
functions
64. Secondary growth refers to the:
(a) Increase in length of plant
(b) Increase in thickness or girth of stem
(c) Having primary tissue
65. The region of mature stem outside of
vascular cambium having secondary
phloem, cork cambium and cork is
collectively called:
(a) Bark (b) Log
(c) Trunk (d) Wood
66. Annual rings are formed in plants due
to the seasonal activity of__________
layer:
(a) Cambium (b) Epidermis
(c) Mesophyll (d) Piliferous
67. The early wood is also called:
(a) Autumn wood
(b) Winter wood
(c) Late wood
(d) Spring wood

--- Page 6 ---
68. Xylem and phloem are generated by:
(a) Cambium
(b) Cork
(c) Apical meristem
(d) Intercalary meristem
69. Cambium is highly active during:

(a) Spring (b) Winter
(c) Autumn (d) Summer
70. The scientific method of dating and
studying tree rings is called:
(a) Histology
(b) Gerontology
(c) Teratology
(d) Dendrochronology
71. The plant hormones which promotes
cell division in cambium, inhibit
growth at higher concentration and
promote apical dominance are:
(a) Auxins (b) Gibberellins
(c) Cytokinins (d) Ethylene
72. Which of the following plant growth
regulator promotes bolting of rosette
plants?
(a) Gibberellic acid
(b) Indole acetic acid
(c) Cytokinins
(d) Ethene
73. Cytokinins are characterized by:

(a) Promote cytokinesis during cell
division
(b) Increase rate of DNA replications
(c) Antagonist to gibberellins
(d) Both (a) and (b)
74. Which statement is correct about
ABA:
(a) Promotes flowering in pineapples
(b) Promotes flowering in short-day
plants and inhibits in long day plants
(c) Promotes bolting in rosette plants
(d) Promotes apical dominance

75. Ethylene is a natural product of
metabolism of plants which:
(a) Promotes flowering in pineapples
(b) Inhibits fruit ripening
(c) Promotes seed dormancy
Osmoregulation in Plants
76. The process by which an organism
maintains a stable internal equilibrium
of water and dissolved substance is:
(a) Thermoregulation
(b) Excretion
(c) Respiration
(d) Osmoregulation
77. A solution having reduced solute
concentration relative to the
intracellular environment of a cell is
called:
(a) Hypotonic environment
(b) Hypertonic environment
(c) Isotonic environment
(d) None of these
78. If a cell is placed in a solution having
high solute concentration relative to
the intracellular environment of cell,
what happens after sometime?
(a) Swelling of cell
(b) Shrinking of cell
(c) Bursting of cell
(d) Cell remain unaffected
79. In which type of environment/solution,
the net movement of water between the
cell and the environment is zero?
(a) Hypotonic (b) Hypertonic
(c) Isotonic (d) Distilled water
80. Which statement about the Marine
hydrophytes is not true/correct?
(a) Thrive in saline conditions
(b) Expel water through hydathodes
(c) Excrete salts by special glands
(d) Retain water

--- Page 7 ---
81. Which of the following categories of
plants have halophytic traits tolerate
high salinity?
(a) Halophytes
(b) Xerophytes
(c) Mesophytes
(d) Marine hydrophytes
82. Seaweeds and tape grass are examples of:
(a) Halophytes (b) Xerophytes
(c) Mesophytes (d) Hydrophytes
83. The plants which do not require any
special adaptations to survive:
(a) Mesophytes (b) Hydrophytes
(c) Xerophytes (d) Both (b) and (c)
84. Which of the following is not a
mesophyte?
(a) Daises (b) Tomatoes
(c) Rose (d) Blue agave
85. Pick the succulent plant.
(a) Marigold (b) Tape grass
(c) Daises (d) Rose
86. The plants inhabiting saline soil are:
(a) Halophytes
(b) Xerophytes
(c) Hydrophytes
(d) Marine hydrophytes
87. The plants having succulent leaves of
stem, grow in high concentrations of
MgSO4, MgCl2 and NaCl are called:
(a) Xerophytes (b) Halophytes
(c) Heliophiles (d) Cacti
88. Halophytes growing in marshy places
near seashore form a special vegetation
known as:
(a) Mangrove
(b) Tidal woodland
(c) Helophilous
Thermoregulation in Plants
89. The plants of temperate regions are
adapted to survive heat stress by:

(a) Synthesizing heat-shock proteins
(b) Shedding leaves
(c) Synthesizing unsaturated fatty acids
(d) Increasing proportion solutes
90. Oaks, maples and roses are adapted to
prevent ice crystal formation by:
(a) Heat-shock proteins
(b) Increasing proportion of unsaturated
fatty acids
(c) Changing solute composition of cells
(d) Evaporation
Movements in Plants
91. The movements which occur as a
curvature of whole organ towards or
away from stimulus in plants are called:
(a) Autonomic (b) Nastic
(c) Tropic (d) Phototactic
92. Which of the following is not tropic
movement?
(a) Phototropism (b) Phototactic
(c) Geotropic (d) Thigmotropic
93. The movement in response to touch is called:

(a) Thigmotropism(b) Geotropism
(c) Chemotropism (d) Phototropism
Photoperiodism
94. Effect of photoperiodism was first
studied by Garner and Allard in:

(a) 1901 (b) 1920
(c) 1831 (d) 1960
95. The quiescent form of phytochrome is:

(a) P660 (b) P730
(c) P880 (d) P700
96. Cocklebur is an example of:
(a) SDPs (b) LDPs
(c) DNPs (d) FDPs
97. Flowering induced by dark periods
shorter than a critical length is the
characteristic of:
(a) SDPs (b) LDPs
(c) DNPs (d) all of them
Vernalization
98. In vernalization low temperature
stimulus is received by:
(a) Root apex (b) Shoot apex
(c) Leaves (d) Stem

--- Page 8 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

99. Duration of low temperature (chilling)
    treatment varies from:
    (a) 3 days to 4 months
    (b) 7 days to 1 year
    (c) 40 days only
    (d) 4 days to 3 months

100. Target of florigen hormone is:
     (a) Flower
     (b) Floral bud
     (c) Leaf
     (d) Roots

ANSWER KEY
1. a 2. d 3. b 4. c 5. a 6. c 7. a
8. b 9. b 10. b 11. b 12. a 13. a 14. b
15. c 16. c 17. b 18. c 19. d 20. d 21. d
22. a 23. d 24. a 25. a 26. d 27. c 28. a
29. c 30. c 31. d 32. a 33. b 34. b 35. a
36. c 37. a 38. a 39. b 40. c 41. a 42. c
43. a 44. b 45. a 46. d 47. d 48. a 49. c
50. c 51. d 52. d 53. d 54. b 55. b 56. b
57. d 58. d 59. a 60. b 61. d 62. a 63. a
64. b 65. a 66. a 67. d 68. a 69. a 70. d
71. a 72. a 73. d 74. b 75. a 76. d 77. a
78. b 79. c 80. b 81. d 82. d 83. a 84. d
85. a 86. a 87. b 88. d 89. a 90. c 91. c
92. b 93. a 94. b 95. a 96. a 97. b 98. b
99. d 100. b

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch8 MCQ's.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [33/36]: 11th Bio New Ch8 Short Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
Unit 8: Plant Physiology

Short Questions

SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS EXERCISE

Q1. Differentiate between macronutrients
and micronutrients in plants?
| Macronutrients | Micronutrients |
| :--- | :--- |
| • Macronutrients are needed in relatively larger amounts in plants for growth and development. | • Micronutrients are needed in very smaller amounts in plants for growth and development. |
| • There are nine macronutrients in plants i.e., carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, potassium, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium and sulphur. | • There are seven micronutrients i.e., iron, manganese, zinc, molybdenum, copper, chlorine and boron. |

Q2. What is water potential?
Ans. Water molecules possess kinetic energy
which means that in liquid or gaseous form they
move about rapidly and randomly from one
place to another. So, greater the concentration of
the water molecules in a system the greater is the
total kinetic energy of water molecules. This is
called water potential psi = Ψw.
Factors: In plant cells, two factors determine
water potential i.e., Solute potential (Ψs) and
Pressure potential (ΨP).
Pure water has maximum water potential which
by definition is zero. Water moves from a region
of higher Ψw to lower Ψw.

Q3. What are the main three pathways
for the movement of water between plant
cells?
Ans. 1. The Apoplast Pathway
It is a continuous pathway that involves a
system of adjacent cell walls in the plant
roots. The apoplast pathway becomes

--- Page 2 ---
discontinuous in the endodermis in the roots
due to the presence of Casparian segments.
2. The Symplast Pathway
In symplast pathway, water and minerals move
through interconnected protoplasts of root cells.
The protoplasts of neighbouring cells are
interconnected through plasmodesmata, which
are cytoplasmic strands that extend through
pores in adjacent cell walls. The symplast
pathway is less important, except for minerals in
the region of endodermis
3. The Vacuolar Pathway
In vacuolar pathway, water and minerals move
through cell membranes, cytoplasm and
tonoplast (membranes of vacuoles) and
vacuoles. They move from vacuole to vacuole
and bypass the symplast and apoplast pathways.
Movement in vacuolar pathway is negligible.
Q4. Differentiate between hypertonic and hypotonic solution.
Hypotonic Solution
• A solution having reduced solute
concentration relative to the intracellular
environment of a cell.
• As a result, water enters the cell by
osmosis resulting in the swelling.
Hypertonic Solution
• A solution having high solute
concentration relative to the intracellular
environment of a cell.
• As a result, water moves out of the cell
which causes the cell to shrink due to loss
of water, a condition called plasmolysis.
Q5. What are halophytes?
Ans. Halophytes are the plants that inhabit
in saline soil with high concentrations of salts
like NaCl, MgCl2, MgSO4, or saline water. On
such a substratum, only such plants can grow
which can tolerate a relatively high
concentration of these salts.
Succulent leaves: These plants have succulent
leaves and sometimes the stem is also
succulent. In certain cases, leaves are
modified into spines.
Examples of halophytes are sea arrow grass
and sea lavender
Q6. Differentiate between long day
plants and short day plants?
Short-day plants
The plants in which
flowering induced
by dark periods
longer than a
Long-day plants
The plants in which
flowering induced
by dark periods
shorter than a
critical length, e.g..
cocklebur 8.5h;
tobacco 10-11h.
Examples include
cocklebur
(Xanthium),
chrysanthemum
soyabean, tobacco,
strawberry.
critical length, e.g.,
henbane 13h.
Examples include
henbane
(Hyoscyamus niger)
Snapdragon,
cabbage, spring,
wheat, spring
barely.
Q7. Write down the phases of plant
growth?
Ans. 1. Cell Division: The cells of apical
meristems undergo divisions and the number
of cells is increased.
2. Cell Elongation: After the formation of
new cells, their volume increases due to
uptake of water.
3. Cell Differentiation: After the cells have
got their final size and shape, elongation
stops and cells are specialized to perform
specific functions.

--- Page 3 ---
Q8. Differentiate between vernalin and florigen.
Vernalin
Florigen
Vernalin is a hormone which induces
vernalization which is a process in biennial
and perennial plants to stimulate flowering
by exposure to low temperature (4 days to 3
months).
Florigen is a hormone produced in leaves in
response to different concentration of P730;
it travels through phloem to floral buds
initiating flowering.
Q9. Differentiate between Thigmotropism and Geotropism?
Thigmotropism
Geotropism
• It is the movement in response to stimulus
of touch. When they come in contact with
some solid object, the growth on the
opposite side of contact increases and the
tendril coils around the support.
• For example climbing vines.
• It is the movement of plant parts in
response to gravity.
• For example, roots display positive
geotropism and shoots show negative
geotropism.
Q10. How intercalary meristem is different from apical meristem?
Apical Meristems
Intercalary Meristems
• Apical meristems are found at the tips of
roots and shoots.
• They are primarily responsible for the
extension of the plant body. These are
perpetual growth zones found and are
responsible for the increase in the number
of cells at the tips of roots and stems. They
play an important role in primary growth.
• The type of meristem situated at the base
of internodes.
• They are actually the part of apical
meristem, which are separated by
permanent tissues.
• Play an important role in the production
of leaves and flower, and are of temporary
nature.
SLO BASED SHORT QUESTION ANSWERS
Nutrition in Plants
Q11. Differentiate between nutrient and nutrition.
Nutrient
Nutrition
• A nutrient is a substance that provides the
body with essential ingredients required
for metabolism.
• Specific nutrients, such as carbohydrates,
lipids, and proteins, serve as sources of
energy.
• Nutrition refers to the collective processes
involved in the intake and utilization of
nutrients for growth, repair, and
maintenance of activities in an organism.
• It is of two types i.e. autotrophic and
heterotrophic nutrition.

--- Page 4 ---
• Other nutrients, including water,
electrolytes, minerals, and vitamins, are
necessary for the metabolic process.
Q12. What are the roles of Nitrogen and
Magnesium in plant? Also describe effects
of their deficiencies.
Ans. Role of Nitrogen
• Nitrogen is necessary for plant growth as
it plays an essential role in energy
metabolism and the production of proteins.
• Deficiency of nitrogen: A deficiency of
nitrogen results in leaf loss and stunted
growth.
Role of Magnesium
• Magnesium constitutes the core of the
chlorophyll molecule and is therefore
essential for photosynthesis.
• It promotes the absorption and
transportation of phosphorus and also
contributes to the storage of sugars within
the plant.
• Magnesium deficiencies result in weak
stalks, loss of greenness in the oldest
leaves, and the appearance of yellow and
brown spots.
Q13. Describe the roles of phosphorous
and potassium in plant growth.
Ans. Role of Phosphorus
• Phosphorus is a part of ATP. It also plays
a role in promoting root growth and favours
flowering in the aerial zone.
• Deficiency of phosphorus: A deficiency
of phosphorus leads to delayed flowering,
as well as the browning and wrinkling of
the leaves.
Role of Potassium
• Potassium is involved in water regulation
and the transportation of the plant's reserve
substances.
• It enhances the ability of plants to
carry out photosynthesis, reinforces
cellular tissue, and stimulates the uptake of
nitrates.
• Deficiency results in dark patches on the
leaves.
Q14. What are effects of deficiencies of
calcium and sulphur?
Ans. Effect of Calcium Deficiency
• Calcium provides stability to the cell wall
and promotes the development of the cell
wall.
• It also plays a role in cellular proliferation
and maturation, and aiding in the
development of seeds.
• Insufficient calcium leads to the
development of yellow and brown patches
on the leaves.
Effect off Sulfur Deficiency
• Sulfur is a fundamental element in the
metabolism of nitrogen.
• If there is a shortage of sulfur, the plant
becomes lighter in colour
Q15. How iron and manganese are
important to plants?
Ans. Importance of Iron
Iron is essential for the synthesis of
chlorophyll. It acts as a cofactor for several
enzymes which are involved in energy
transfer and nitrogen metabolism.
Deficiency: Its deficiency results in
interveinal chlorosis.
Importance of Manganese
Manganese is involved in the process of
photosynthesis, nitrogen metabolism,
carbohydrate metabolism and activation of
enzymes.
Deficiency: Its deficiency results in the
premature falling of the leaf and delayed
maturity.

--- Page 5 ---
Q16. How does zinc and molybdenum
are critical in plant growth?
Ans. Zinc
• Zinc facilitates chlorophyll synthesis, root
development and uptake of nutrients.
• Deficiency of zinc can lead to stunted
growth.
Molybdenum
• Molybdenum is critical for nitrogen
fixation, nitrogen reduction, sulfur
metabolism, phosphorus metabolism and
iron utilization.
• Deficiency: Its deficiency can result in
chlorosis of older leaves and stunted
growth.
Q17. How does zinc and chlorine
deficiencies manifest in plants?
Ans. Zinc
• Zinc facilitates chlorophyll synthesis, root
development and uptake of nutrients.
• Deficiency of zinc can lead to stunted
growth.
Chlorine
• Chlorine is involved in stomatal
regulation, osmotic adjustment and
transport of nutrients.
• Deficiency: Its deficiency can affect the
health and growth of plants.
Q18. All insectivorous plants are true
autotrophs then why does they capture
insects?
Ans. Insectivorous plants supplement
organic molecules into their food in
addition to inorganic nutrients, acquired
through the process of capturing and
breaking down insects and tiny animals.
• All insectivorous plants are true
autotrophs. However, their
development accelerates when they
capture prey.
• Apparently, nitrogenous compounds of
animal body are of benefit to these plants.
The captured insects are broken down by
enzymes that are released by the leaves.
• Pitcher plant, venus fly trap and sundew
are some of the known insectivorous
plants.
Q19. How does pitcher plant kill insects?
Ans. Pitcher plant has leaves modified
into a sac or a pitcher, partly filled with water.
• The leaf's terminal portion is altered to
create a hood, which partially covers the
exposed opening of the pitcher.
• It has numerous stiff hairs that prevent
little insects from crawling out once they
fall inside it.
Q20. How does venous fly trap is
adapted to fulfil its nitrogen
requirements?
Ans. Venus-fly trap has a "trap" consisting
of two lobes that are hinged at the end of each
leaf. The inner surfaces of the lobes contain
trichomes, which are hair-like projections
that trigger the lobes to close rapidly upon
contact with prey.
• The hinged traps are lined with fine
bristles that interlock upon closure,
preventing the prey from escaping.
• The trapped insect is then digested by the
enzymes secreted from the glands on the
leaf surface and the products are then
absorbed.
Q21. Which plants use/release odour to
trap its prey?
Ans. Sundew catches its prey with shiny
drops of "dew," where the plant's common
name comes from. The leaves are covered
with tiny hairs that look like tentacles.
• Each leaf has gland and has a single dew
like drop at the tip.
• The insects, attracted by plant's odour are
trapped by tentacles.
• The trapped insects are digested by
enzymes and products are absorbed.

--- Page 6 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Gas Exchange in Plants
Q22. Define stomata. Write their function.
Ans. Stomata are tiny opening or pores
present within the plant tissues which are
necessary for gaseous exchange.
• These are typically found in leaves but
can even be present in some stems.
• The stomata are surrounded by
specialized cells or the guard cells that
facilitate the opening and closing of the
stomatal pores.
• Guard cells are bean-shaped and contain
chloroplasts.
• Guard cells can open and close depending
on environmental conditions. The
opening and closing of stomata control
the transpiration rate in plants.
Q23. How are stomata involved in
gaseous exchange?
• During daylight stomata open to allow
CO2 to enter the plant for photosynthesis.
The opening of stomata is primarily
regulated by guard cells.
• At night when photosynthesis ceases due
to lack of light, stomata typically close to
conserve water. However, plants still
respire, taking in O2 and releasing CO2.
The closure of stomata at night helps to
minimize water loss by transpiration.
Q24. Guard cells function as
multisensory hydraulic valves justify.
Ans. Guard cells functions as multisensory
hydraulic values as they open and close in
response of certain environmental factors like
light, CO2 and humidity.
• They change shape due to water potential
and release excess water through
transpiration.

Q25. Brief about starch sugar
hypothesis.
Ans. Starch Sugar Hypothesis
In 1856, German botanist H. Van Mohl
proposed that guard cells in leaf epidermis are
solely responsible for photosynthesis,
producing sugars during the day. During day
time as sugar concentration increases in
guard cells, the water potential drops.
• Water moves into guard cells causing
them to become turgid and open the
stomata.
• At night, photosynthesis ceases, and
sugars are converted to insoluble starch or
used for respiration, leading to a decline
in free sugars. Consequently, water
moves out of guard cells and they lose
turgor pressure. So, they become flaccid
and close the stomata.
Q26. How does K+ ions facilitate opening
and closing of stomata? Also describe role
of blue light in K-influx.
Ans. The opening of stomata in plants is
facilitated by the active transport of
potassium ions (K+) into guard cells, which
reduces their osmotic potential. This influx of
K+ leads to water entering the guard cells
through osmosis, causing them to become
turgid and open the stomata.
• Blue light enhances this process by
acidifying the surrounding environment,
promoting K+ uptake and subsequent
water absorption.
• At night, K+ passively diffuses out of the
guard cells, resulting in water loss and
causing the guard cells to become flaccid,
thereby closing the stomata.
★Q27. How does abscisic acid overrides
the effect of light and CO2 in stomatal
movements?
Ans. Hormones are involved in stomatal
movement in plants during stress conditions.
At high temperature when leaf cells start

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 7 ---
wilting, a hormone called abscisic acid, is
released by mesophyll cells. This hormone
stops the active transport of K+ into guard
cells, overriding the effect of light and CO2
concentration. So, K+ pumping stops and
stomata close.
Q28. Describe the location of palisade
tissue. How the arrangement of their cells
maximize light absorption and gaseous
exchange?
Ans. Palisade tissue is primarily located
just beneath the upper epidermis of the leaf.
It consists of elongated, tightly packed cells
that are rich in chlorophyll. The arrangement
of these cells is organized to maximize light
absorption and allowing plants to efficiently
convert light energy into chemical energy.
Q29. Draw the sketch of structure of leaf.
[IMAGE]
Support in Plants
Q30. Define tonoplast. How does it
maintain turgor pressure / rigidity of
cells?
Ans. The membrane that surrounds the
vacuole is called the tonoplast. It has many
active transport mechanisms that move ions
into the vacuole, even when the concentration
within the vacuole is higher than that of the
surrounding fluid.
• Due to the elevated ionic concentration,
water is drawn into the vacuole, resulting
in turgidity and providing mechanical
support to the plant's soft tissues.

Q31. How does parenchyma provide
support in plants?
Ans. The parenchyma tissue provides
support to herbaceous plants and parts of
larger plants.
• The parenchyma cells of the epidermis,
cortex, and pith absorb water This water
creates an internal hydrostatic pressure
known as turgor pressure that maintains
the rigidity of cells.
Turgor pressure arises from the elevated
osmotic pressure within the cell vacuole.
Q32. Describe the role of collenchyma
tissue in context of support.
Ans. Collenchyma cells are specialized
cells that are grouped in the form of strands
or cylinders.
• They are found beneath the epidermis
of young stems, leaf stalks and along
the veins in leaves.
• Collenchyma cells lack secondary
walls.
• Their primary walls are thickened at the
corners, due to extra deposition of
cellulose.
• They elongate when stem or leaf grows
lengthwise. They provide support to the
young parts of plant in which secondary
growth has not taken place.
Q33. Sclerenchyma confer strength and
rigidity to the cell walls of plants.
Ans. Sclerenchyma
This tissue also provides structural support
to the plants. Typically, the cells of
sclerenchyma tissue possess thick
secondary cell walls.
• These walls are saturated with lignin,
an organic compound that confers
strength and rigidity to the walls.
• The majority of sclerenchyma cells are
non-living.
• The main function of this tissue is to
provide support to the various
components of the plant.

--- Page 8 ---
Q34. Name the types of sclerenchyma cells and describe their roles.
Ans. There are three types of sclerenchyma cells which are fibres, sclereids and vessels.
1. Fibers (Tracheids) are elongated and cylindrical in shape. They can be found either as compact bundles inside the xylem or as bundle caps.
2. Sclereids are smaller in size as compared to fibers and are present in the seed coats and shells of nuts. Their function is to offer protection.
3. Vessels (Tracheae) are long tubular structures that are joined end to end to form a long water conducting pipe in xylem.

Water Potential
Q35. Differentiate between solute potential and pressure potential.
Solute Potential | Pressure Potential
--- | ---
• The solute potential or osmotic potential is a measure of the change in water potential (Ψw) of a system due to the presence of solute molecules. | • It is the part of water potential which is due to the pressure exerted by water it is denoted by Ψp. If pressure greater than atmospheric pressure is applied to pure water or a solution, its water potential increases.
• Ψs is always a negative value, so if more solute molecules are present, lower (more negative) is the Ψs. | • When water enters plant cells by osmosis, pressure may be built up inside the cell making the cell turgid and increasing the pressure potential

Transport of Water in Plants
Q36. Describe the role of roots and root hairs for efficient transport of water from soil to xylem. Enroute water from soil to xylem.
Ans. Roots of plants provide large surface area for absorption by their extensive branching systems. Roots have tiny root hairs, which are actually extensions of epidermal cells of roots. Most of the uptake of water and minerals in roots takes place through root hairs.
From soil, water and minerals enter the root epidermal cells by active and passive transport. From root epidermis, they move to cortex, and then into the xylem tissue in the centre of root. Inside roots, water and minerals move in three different pathways to reach the xylem.

Q37. Draw the sketch show transport of sap using different pathways.
[Image of cell diagram with labels: Plasmode smata, Tonoplast, Vacuole, Cell wall, Cytoplasm, apoplast pathway, Symplast pathway, Vacuolar pathway]

Q38. Name the structural components of xylem tissue.
Ans. Following are the structural components of xylem tissue:
1. Tracheids
2. Vessels
3. Xylem fibres
4. Xylem parenchyma

--- Page 9 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q39. Compare tracheids with vessels.
| Tracheids | Vessels |
| :--- | :--- |
| • Tracheids are elongated thin cells that have thick walls made of lignin. | • Vessels are shorter and broader compared to tracheids. They are arranged in a linear fashion, forming continuous channels. |
| • The ends of the cells are tapered and they are linked to each other by bordered pits, which enable the lateral movement of water between cells. | • Perforation plates are present at the outer edges of these structures, enabling efficient movement of water. |

Q40. Characterize xylem fibres and xylem parenchyma.
| Xylem Fibres | Xylem Parenchyma |
| :--- | :--- |
| Xylem fibres are elongated cells with thickened lignified walls. At maturity, they are dead and enhance the structural integrity of the xylem. They offer additional structural support to the plant | Xylem parenchyma are living cells with thin walls that have the ability to retain and hold nutrients and water Xylem parenchyma cells participate in the lateral translocation of water and nutrients and can also contribute to the healing and regeneration of xylem tissue. |

Q41. Draw the diagrams showing different structural components of xylem tissue.
[Image of xylem components]
Components of Xylem Tissue

Q42. Transpiration act as the primary driving force behind water transport in xylem. Justify.
Ans. Transpiration is the process by which water evaporates from the surface of plant leaves, specifically through stomata. As water vapour exits the leaf, a negative pressure is generated within the leaf tissue.
• This negative pressure creates a pulling force, drawing water upward from the roots through the stem and toward the leaves.
• Transpiration, therefore, act as the primary driving force behind water transport in the xylem.

Q43. Compare the roles of different forces of attraction involved in transpiration. / Compare the roles of adhesive forces and cohesive forces in movement of water.
| Adhesion | Cohesion |
| :--- | :--- |
| • Adhesion is the attraction between water molecules and the walls of the xylem vessels. | • Cohesion refers to the attractive force between water molecules themselves, caused by hydrogen bonding. |

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 10 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                                    [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

• Due to this attraction, water molecules
stick to the walls of xylem vessels as they
move upward. This property prevents any
break in the water column within xylem.
• Adhesion thus play a crucial role in
maintaining the continuity of the water
column, especially in tall plants where
gravity exerts a significant downward
force on the water column.

Q44. Tension is vital for the continuous
ascent of water within xylem justify.

Ans. Tension is the negative pressure
created by the pulling force of the
transpiration at the leaf level. As water
evaporates from the leaf surface, it creates a
low-pressure area that extends through the
xylem. This tension pulls the cohesive water
column upwards. Tension is therefore vital
for the continuous ascent of water within the
xylem.
Translocation of Food
Q45. What do you know about TACT
theory?
Ans. The TACT (Transpiration, Adhesion,
Cohesion, Tension) also known as cohesion-
tension theory, is a widely accepted model
explaining how water moves against gravity
through the xylem to reach all parts of the
plant. This mechanism depends on both
physical and chemical properties of water
and the plant's interaction with its
environment.
Q46. Enlist the structural components of
phloem.
Ans. Phloem comprises of four major
components
• Sieve elements
• Companion cells
• Phloem fibres
• Phloem parenchyma.

• Water molecules within the xylem stick
together, forming an unbroken column
from the roots to the leaves.
• This cohesive property of water ensures
that the "pull" initiated by transpiration at
the leaf level extends down through the
entire water column.

Q47. Write few lines about phloem
tissue?
Ans. Phloem Tissue
• Phloem is a vascular tissue in plants
responsible for the transport of organic
nutrients, particularly the products of
photosynthesis, from the leaves to other
parts of the plant where they are needed
or stored.
• The phloem is generally found on the
outer side of both primary and
secondary vascular tissue in plants with
secondary growth and constitutes the inner
bark.
Q48. Describe the importance of sieve
tube elements in transport of sugars.

Ans. The cells of phloem that transport
sugars and other organic material throughout
the plant are called sieve tube elements or
cells. Sieve tube elements have 'sieve areas',
which are the portions of the cell wall where
pores interconnect the sieve tube elements.
Sieve tube elements join to form long sieve
tube, which is used to transport food from
source to sink.
Q49. Which substances are stored in
phloem parenchyma?
Ans. Phloem parenchyma stores
substances, such as sugars, resins, latex, and
mucilage, which are important for plant
defence and moisture retention.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                                    [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 11 ---
Translocation of Food in Plants
Q50. Which passive theories were proposed for transport in phloem? Which theory is most widely accepted?
Ans. Passive theories of phloem transport include: Diffusion and pressure flow theory.
The pressure-flow theory, also known as the mass-flow hypothesis, is the most widely accepted explanation for the transport of sugars in plants through the phloem. This process of translocation moves sugar from the source (where they are synthesized) to the sink (where they are consumed or stored). This theory was proposed by Ernst Munch in 1930. This theory relies on the principle of osmotic pressure differences between source and sink regions.

Growth in Plants
Q51. What are growth pattern in plants?
Ans. Growth in plants refers to a permanent increase in size, which can occur in various dimensions such as height, width, and mass.
• Throughout life, the plant adds organs such as branches, leaves, and roots. Its organs increase in size from the tips but the rate of growth is not uniform throughout the body.
Q52. What are meristems? Give their types.
Ans. In higher plants, growth is limited to certain regions known as growing points. These growing points consist of groups of cells, called meristems, that are capable of continuous cell division.
• There are three types of meristems in plants i.e., apical meristem, intercalary meristem and lateral meristem.

Q53. How intercalary meristem is different from apical meristem?
Apical Meristem
• The type of meristem that are found at the tips of roots and shoots.
• They are primarily responsible for the extension of the plant body. These are perpetual growth zones found and are responsible for the increase in the number of cells at the tips of roots and stems.
• They play an important role in primary growth.

Intercalary Meristem
• The type of meristem situated at the base of internodes.
• They are actually the part of apical meristem, which are separated by permanent tissues.
• Play an important role in the production of leaves and flower, and are of temporary nature.

Q54. Characterize lateral meristem. Describe its main forms.
Ans. Lateral meristems are cylinders of dividing cells present along the peripheral regions. They are responsible for growth in thickness of stems and roots. They are found in woody plants and are crucial for secondary growth.
• There are two main forms of lateral meristems; vascular cambium and cork cambium.
• Vascular cambium is located between the xylem and phloem and is responsible for production of secondary xylem and secondary phloem.
• Cork cambium is formed in the outer layer of stems and roots. This tissue produces cork cells which replace the epidermis and forms the outer protective bark.

--- Page 12 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q55. Define primary growth. Name its
phases.
Ans. Primary growth is responsible for an
increase in the length of the plants. It is
facilitated by the activity of apical meristems.
Herbaceous plants generally display primary
growth with little secondary growth as
compared to woody plants.
The process of primary growth in plants
occurs in three phases.
1. Cell Division
2. Cell Elongation
3. Cell Differentiation
Q56. Describe the events of zone of cell
division.
• The cells of apical meristems undergo
divisions and the number of cells is
increased.
• It happens at the tips of apical meristems of
root and shoot. The area of apical meristem
where cell division occurs, is called zone of
cell division.
• In this zone, cells are non-vacuolated and
small. These cells have spherical nuclei in
the centre of cytoplasm.
Q57. Describe the changes associated
with cell elongation phase.
• During elongation phase volume of cell
increases due to uptake of water.
• Plasticity of cell wall increases and wall
pressure is reduced. It happens at a little
distance from the tips of apical meristems.
• The area where cell elongation occurs, is
called zone of cell elongation. In this zone,
cells are vacuolated and large. They have
nuclei in the peripheries of cytoplasm.
• During this phase, different cells elongate
in different dimensions and the final size of
cells is attained.
• For example, the cells which are
determined to develop into pith. cortex etc.
do not elongate much length-wise while
the cells which are determined to develop
into xylem tissue elongate more length-
wise.
Q58. What happens after the cells got
their final size and shape during primary
growth? / Describe the final changes in
plants during primary growth.
Ans. Cell Differentiation: After the cells
have got their final size and shape, elongation
stops and cells are specialized to perform
specific functions, thus is termed as phase of
cell differentiation.
• Their cell walls become thicker and many
new structural features develop.
• It happens in the area next to the zone of
elongation. This area is called zone of cell
differentiation.
• In this zone, cells are fully differentiated
and each type of cell performs specific
function.
Q59. Define secondary growth. Which
tissue/ cells are responsible for it?
Ans. Secondary growth refers to the
increase in thickness or girth of stems and
roots. It is due to the activity of lateral
meristems, specifically the vascular cambium
and cork cambium. It is more prominent in
woody perennial plants, while herbaceous
plants show only primary growth. The cells
of vascular cambium divide and produce new
cells on both of its outer and inner margins.
Q60. Secondary tissues cause increase in
plants thickness. Justify.
• Secondary tissues (particularly secondary
xylem) cause increase in plant's
thickness.
• The cells of vascular cambium divide and
produce new cells on both of its outer and
inner margins of vascular cambium make
secondary phloem while the cells

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 13 ---
produced on its inner margins make
secondary xylem.
• Division in cork cambium produces cells
on both outer and inner sides. The cells
make new cork.
Q61. Define bark and annual rings.

Ans. Bark: The region of mature stem
outside of the vascular cambium, which
contains secondary phloem, cork cambium
and cork, is collectively called bark.
A concentric layer of wood formed each year
in woody plants is called annual ring. Annual
rings are formed due to the seasonal activity
of the cambium layer in trees. These rings
provide valuable information about the age of
the tree and the environmental conditions
experienced during each growing season.
Q62. What is cambium? Describe the
effect of seasonal changes on its activity
and formation of annual ring?
Ans. The cambium is a meristematic tissue
that generates new vascular tissues i.e.,
xylem and phloem.
• In spring: In spring, when conditions are
favourable, the cambium is highly active,
producing a large volume of xylem with
wider vessels, resulting in lighter-
coloured spring wood.
• In autumn: As the season changes to
autumn, the cambium's activity
decreases. It produces fewer xylem
elements, which are narrower and denser,
leading to the wood forms a complete
annual ring.
★Q63.Define dendrochronology and its
importance.
Ans. Dendrochronology is the scientific
method of dating and studying tree rings to
analyze past climate conditions and events.

Q64. What are plant growth regulators?
Name their five major groups.
Ans. Plants regulate the rates of growth
and the rate of metabolism in their cells.
Special chemical messengers, called plant
growth regulators or plant hormones
regulate their growth. There are five major
groups of plant growth regulators i.e., auxins,
cytokinins, gibberellins, abscisic acid, and
ethylene.
Q65. Describe some important roles of
Auxins/Indole Acetic Acid.
Ans. Auxin (IAA) is one of the most
important plant growth regulator it:
1. Promotes cell division in cambium.
2. In roots, promote growth at very low
concentrations. Inhibit growth at higher
concentrations, e.g., geotropism. Promote
growth of roots from cuttings and calluses.
3. Promotes bud initiation in shoots but
sometimes antagonistic to cytokinins and
is inhibitory.
Q66. Where are gibberellins produced?
Describe their important activities.
Ans. Gibberellins are produced in apical
portions of roots and shoots and transported
to other parts.
• Promote cell enlargement in the presence
of auxins. Also promote cell division in
apical meristem and cambium.
• Promote 'bolting' of some rosette plants.
• Promote bud initiation in shoots of
chrysanthemum callus.
• Sometimes may substitute for red light.
Therefore, promote flowering in long-day
plants, while inhibit in short-day plants.
Q67. Why are cytokinins important for
plant growth?
Ans. Cytokinins are usually produced in
roots, young fruits and in seeds.
Cytokinins promote cytokinesis during cell
division. They increase the rate of DNA
replication and the rate of RNA and protein

--- Page 14 ---
synthesis. They perform the following
functions:
• Promote stem growth by cell division in
apical meristem and cambium.
• Inhibit primary root growth.
• Promote lateral root growth.
Q68. Describe the effects of abscisic acid
on plant stem, roots flowering and
stomata.
Ans. Abscisic acid (ABA) is synthesized
mainly in mature green leaves, fruits and root
caps. It performs the following functions:
• Inhibits stem and root growth notably
during physiological stress e.g., drought
and waterlogging.
• Promotes bud and seed dormancy.
• Promotes flowering in short day plants
and inhibits in long day plants
(antagonistic to gibberellins).
Q69. How does Ethene/ethylene support
the plants during physiological stress?

Ans. It is a natural product of the
metabolism of plants. Inhibits stem growth,
notably during physiological stress.
• Inhibits root growth
• Breaks root growth
• Promotes flowering in pineapple
• Promotes fruit ripening.
Osmoregulation in Plants
Q70. Define osmoregulation. How
osmoconformers differ from
osmoregulators?
Ans. Osmoregulation refers to the process
by which an organism maintains a stable
internal equilibrium of water and dissolved
substances, irrespective of the surrounding
environmental conditions.
• Osmoconformers: Many marine
organisms undergo osmosis without the
requirement for regulatory systems since
their cells have the same osmotic pressure
as that of the sea are called
osmoconformers.
• Osmoregulators: Organisms must
actively acquire, retain, or eliminate
water or salts in order to regulate their
internal water and mineral balance are
called osmoregulators.
Q71. Define hydrophytes. How are
freshwater hydrophytes adapted to live in
water?
Ans. Hydrophytes: These are the plants
adapted to aquatic environments (marine and
freshwater) by specialized mechanisms of
osmotic adjustments.
Freshwater hydrophytes grow in hypotonic
environments, where water continuously
enters their cells.
• These plants remove excess water
through structures like hydathodes or
vacuoles to avoid overhydration.
• They actively absorb essential ions, such
as potassium and calcium, to maintain
osmotic balance and compensate for the
dilute surroundings.
• With thin or absent cuticles, these plants
facilitate water exchange and often have
reduced root systems, relying on direct
nutrient and water absorption from their
environment.
Examples of hydrophytes are water lilies,
lotus, seaweeds and tape grass.
Q72. How plants maintain osmoregulation
in moderate environments?
Ans. Mesophytes live in moderate
environments that are neither too dry nor too
wet.
• They prefer soil that is not waterlogged
and has a moderate salt content and
humidity.
• Mesophytes have well-developed roots
and shoots with a fully formed vascular
system.

--- Page 15 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

• They do not require any special
adaptations to survive.
• Their leaves are flat, broad, and green
with stomata on the surface.
• Examples of mesophytes include rose,
tomatoes, and daisies.
Q73. How plants are adapted to live in
dry conditions? / Describe the adaptations
in succulents to reduce transpiration.

Ans. Xerophytes are plants that are
adapted to survive in dry conditions.

• They have special adaptations to
minimize water loss and store water.
• Plants that store water are known as
succulents.
• They possess fleshy stems that can store
water and used when needed.
• Other adaptations in xerophytes include
waxy coatings on leaves to reduce water
loss, leaf dropping during dry periods,
and leaf folding or repositioning to
absorb sunlight efficiently.
• Examples of xerophytes include thorn
trees, desert marigold, and blue agave.
Q74. Differentiate between marine hydrophytes and halophytes.
Marine Hydrophytes                                     Halophytes
• Marine hydrophytes thrive in saline • Halophytes inhabit saline soil with high
(hypertonic) conditions, where water concentrations of salts like NaCl, MgCl2,
tends to leave their cells.                               MgSO4, or saline water.
• They excrete excess salts using • On such a substratum, only those plants can
specialized salt glands and synthesize grow which can tolerate a relatively high
organic solutes like proline, glycine, concentration of these salts. These plants
betaine, and sugars to retain water by have succulent leaves and sometimes the
increasing their internal osmotic stem is also succulent.
potential.                                               • In certain cases, leaves are modified into
• They have thick cuticles which further spines. Examples of halophytes are sea
reduce water loss, and they exhibit arrowgrass and sea lavender.
halophytic traits to tolerate high salinity.

★Q75. What are Helophilous?
Ans. Halophytes growing in marshy places
near seashore from a special vegetation
known as the mangrove or tidal woodland.
These are also called helophilous
halophytes.
Thermoregulation in Plants
Q76. How plants are adapted to survive
in heat stress? / What are heat-stock
proteins?
• High temperature denatures the enzymes
and damages the metabolism.

• Plants use evaporative cooling to cope
with high temperature. Hot and dry
weather, however, causes water deficiency
resulting in closing of stomata, thus plants
suffer in such conditions.
• Most plants have adapted to survive in
heat stress as the plants of temperate
regions face the stress of 40°C and higher
temperature.
• The cells of these plants synthesize large
quantities of special proteins called heat-
shock proteins.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                 [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 16 ---
• These proteins embrace enzymes and
other proteins thus help to prevent their
denaturation.
Q77. Low temperature alters the fluidity
of the cell membrane, how come plants of
these regions are adapted?
Ans. Low temperature
• Low temperature alters the fluidity of the
cell membrane, because lipids of the
membrane become locked into crystalline
structures, which affects the transport of
the solutes. The structure of the membrane
proteins is also affected.
• Plants respond to cold stress by increasing
proportion of unsaturated fatty acids,
which help membrane to maintain structure
at low temperature by preventing crystal
formation. This adaptation requires time.
Because of this reason, rapid chilling of
plants is more stressful than gradual drop in
air temperature.
Q78. How does the plant native to cold
regions prevent ice-crystal formation in
freezing temperature?
Ans. Freezing temperature
Freezing temperature causes ice crystal
formation. The confinement of ice formation
around cell wall does not affect as badly and
plants survive.
• However, formation of ice crystals within
protoplasm perforates membranes and
organelles hence killing the cells.
Adaptations: The plants native to cold
region such as oaks, maples, roses and other
plants have adapted to bring changes in
solutes composition of the cells, which
causes cytosol to super cool without ice
formation, although ice crystals may form in
the cell walls.
Movements in Plants
Q79. Define tropic movements. Name the
major types of tropic movements in plants.
Ans. Tropic movements: The growth
movements in plants that are triggered by an
external stimulus, are collectively called
tropic movements or tropisms.
• Such movements occur as a curvature of
whole organ towards or away from stimuli
such as light, touch, chemical, water and
gravity.
• Following are the major types of tropic
movements in plants.
1. Phototropism
2. Geotropism
3. Thigmotropism
4. Chemotropism
5. Hydrotropism
Q80. Differentiate between phototropism and geotropism.
Phototropism
• It is the movement of parts of plant, in
response to stimulus of light and is
caused by the differential growth of part
of a plant like stem or root.
• The tips of shoots usually show positive
phototropism while roots show negative
phototropism.
Geotropism
• It is the movement of plant parts in
response to gravity.
• Roots display positive geotropism and
shoots negative geotropism.

--- Page 17 ---
Q81. Compare thigmotropism with chemotropism.
| Thigmotropism | Chemotropism |
| :--- | :--- |
| • It is the type of movement in plants in response to stimulus of touch, for example climbing vines. | • It is the type of movement in plants in response to some chemicals is called chemotropism. |
| • When they come in contact with some solid object, the growth on the opposite side of contact increases and the tendril coils around the support. | • For example, the sugary environment on the stigma of a flower induces pollen tube to grow inside the pistil/carpel to reach the ovule. |

Photoperiodism
Q82. Define photoperiodism.
Ans. The response to changes in day length that enables plants to adapt to seasonal changes in their environment is termed as photoperiodism. Simply, it is response of plants to the length of day and night e.g., in strawberries flowering is induced by dark periods longer than a critical length.
Q83. Classify plants on the basis of photoperiodism. / How did Garner and Allard classified plants on the basis of day length?
Ans. Effect of photoperiodism was first studied in 1920 by Garner and Allard. They studied that tobacco plant flowers only after exposure to a series of short days.
• Tobacco plant naturally flowers under same conditions, in autumn, but flowering could be induced by artificially exposing to short days.
• With further studies they were able to classify flowering plants into long-day plants, which require long days for flowering, short-day plants, which require short days for flowering and day-neutral plants which flower without being influenced by photoperiod.
Q84. What are phytochromes? describe its forms.
Ans. Phytochrome, a photoreceptor protein exists in two forms i.e., P660 and P730.
P660 is a quiescent form. It absorbs red light at a wavelength of 660 nm and is converted to active P730 which absorbs far red light at 730 nm and is converted to P660.
• In nature, the P660 to P730 conversion takes place in day light and P730 to P660 conversion occurs in the dark.
• The rate at which P730 is converted to P660 provides the plant with a “clock” for measuring the duration of darkness.
Q85. P730 to P660 interconversion act as plant time regulator for flowering Comment.
Ans. It has been found that red light inhibits flowering in short-day plants but promotes flowering in long-day plants, under conditions during which flowering normally takes place.
• This observation led to the hypothesis that the P730 to P660 interconversion might be the plant time-regulator for flowering.
• According to this hypothesis, P730, converted from P660 by the absorption of red light, would inhibit flowering in short day plants but promote flowering in long day plants.
• Because P730 accumulates in the day and diminishes at night, short day plants could flower only if the night were long enough, during which a great amount of P730 would not be completely inactivated, so that

--- Page 18 ---
enough P730 would remain at the end of
night to promote flowering.
Vernalization
Q86. Define vernalization. Write its
significance.
Ans. The process of induction of flowering
in plants by exposing them to a certain low
(chilling) temperature is called vernalisation.
• For some plants, vernalisation is an
absolute requirement while in some cases
it simply assists in inducing flowering.
• The duration of low temperature (chilling)
treatment varies from four days to three
months.
Significance
• Photoperiodism and vernalisation serve to
synchronise the reproductive behaviour of
plants with their environment, ensuring
reproduction at favourable times of year.
• They also ensure that members of the same
species flower at the same time,
encouraging cross pollination for genetic
variability.

LONG QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)
Q1. Describe osmoregulation in
Hydrophytes and Halophytes?
Ans. See Q20. and Q21 of theory.
Q2. Describe the Physiological
adaptation of plants to extreme conditions.
How do plants adjust their cell membrane
composition and protein structures to
survive high and low temperatures?
Ans. See Q22. of theory.
Q3. What is the role of meristem in the
growth of plants?
Ans. See Q13. of theory.
Q4. Describe the mechanism of opening
and closing of stomata?
Ans. See Q4. of theory.
Q5. Explain the concept of
photoperiodism and its influence on plant
flowering. How do short-day, long and
day-neutral plants differ in their flowering
responses, and what role does
phytochrome plays in this process?
Ans. See Q24. of theory.

INQUISITIVE QUESTIONS
Q1. Can you explain the hypothesis regarding the opening and closing of
stomata?
Ans. The guard cells function as multisensory hydraulic valves. The two hypotheses which
may explain the opening and closing of stomata are starch sugar hypothesis and influx of k+
ion.
Starch Sugar Hypothesis
In 1856, German botanist H. Van Mohl proposed that guard cells in leaf epidermis are solely
responsible for photosynthesis, producing sugars during the day. As sugar concentration
increases in guard cells, the water potential drops. Water moves into guard cells causing them
to become turgid and open the stomata and vice versa.
Influx of K+ ion
The opening of stomata in plants is facilitated by the active transport of potassium ions (K+)
into guard cells, which reduces their osmotic potential. This influx of K- leads to water
entering the guard cells through osmosis, causing them to become turgid and open the stomata.

--- Page 19 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q2. What mechanisms enable carnivorous plants to supplement their nutrient
uptake despite being autotrophs?
Ans. Insectivorous plants supplement organic molecules into their food in addition to
inorganic nutrients. These organic chemicals are acquired through the process of capturing
and breaking down insects and tiny animals. All insectivorous plants are true autotrophs.
However, their development accelerates when they capture prey. Apparently, nitrogenous
compounds of animal body are of benefit to these plants. The captured insects are broken
down by enzymes that are released by the leaves. Pitcher plant, venus fly trap and sundew are
some of the known insectivorous plants.
Pitcher plant: Pitcher plant has leaves modified into a sac or a pitcher, partly filled with
water.
Venus-fly trap: Venus-fly trap has a “trap” consisting of two lobes that are hinged at the end
of each leaf.
Sundew catches its prey with shiny drops of “dew”, where the plant’s common name comes
from.
Q3. How can you say that parenchyma and sclerenchyma provide support to
plants?
Ans. Support in Plants
Supporting tissues play an important role in maintaining the structural integrity, support and
flexibility of plants. These tissues consist of parenchyma, collenchyma, sclerenchyma, xylem
and phloem.
1. Parenchyma
The parenchyma cells of the epidermis, cortex, and pith absorb water. This water creates an
internal hydrostatic pressure known as turgor pressure that maintains the rigidity of cells.
2. Sclerenchyma
The cells of sclerenchyma tissue possess thick secondary cell walls. These walls are
saturated with lignin, an organic compound that confers strength and rigidity to the
walls.
Q4. How do the annual rings depict climatic variability?
Ans. Annual rings are formed due to the
seasonal activity of the cambium layer in trees.
This process is influenced by environmental
factors and results in the production of two
distinct types of wood each year: spring wood
(early wood) and autumn wood (late wood).
These rings provide valuable information about
the age of the tree and the environmental
conditions experienced during each growing
season.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 20 ---
The cambium is a meristematic tissue that generates new vascular tissues i.e., xylem and
phloem.
In spring: In spring, when conditions are favourable, the cambium is highly active,
producing large volume of xylem with wider vessels, resulting in lighter-coloured spring
wood.
In autumn: As the season changes to autumn, the cambium's activity decreases. It produces
fewer xylem elements, which are narrower and denser, leading to the formation of darker
autumn wood.
Q5. How does pressure flow theory explain the movement of sugars through a
plant?
Ans. Pressure flow theory: The pressure-flow theory, also known as the mass-flow
hypothesis, is the most widely accepted explanation for the transport of sugars in plants
through the phloem. This process of translocation moves sugar from the source (where they
are synthesized) to the sink (where they are consumed or stored). This theory relies on the
principle of osmotic pressure differences between source and sink regions.
There is a higher water potential at the source end while a lower water potential at the sink
end. The difference in water potential causes water to flow from source to sink. Since sucrose
is dissolved in water, it is carried along from source to sink along with water.
Q6. What strategies would you adopt to induce flowering in a plant?
Ans. Flowering can be induced by growing plants in controlled environment.
1. By variation in critical length and dark periods
• For inducing flowering in short day plants, keep them in light for short duration and
increasing their dark period artificially.
• For inducing flowering in long day plants, keeping them in dark for shorter duration
can induce flowering.
2. By temperature treatment
Biennial and perennial plants are stimulated to flowering by exposure to low temperature
(chilling) from four days to three months, this process is also called vernalization.

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch8 Short Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [34/36]: 11th Bio New Ch9 Long Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 9: Human Digestive System

Long Questions

DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONS

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF DIGESTIVE SYSTEM

Q1. Define Digestion. Mention its importance and components of digestive
system.
Ans. Definition: Digestion is a process by which the body breaks down food into smaller
absorbable components.
Components
Human digestive system is composed of gastrointestinal (GI) tract and accessory digestive
organs. The GI tract is a continuous tube that extends from mouth to anus. Oral cavity is the
first part of GI tract. Accessory digestive organs of oral
cavity are the salivary glands.
Oral Cavity: It is a cavity immediately after the
opening of mouth.
Functions of oral cavity
(i) Selection of food: The muscular tongue plays role in
selection of food through its taste bonds. When food
enters the oral cavity, it is tasted and physically felt. If
the taste or smell is unpleasant or if hard objects like
bone or dirt are present in the food, it is rejected. The
senses of smell and sight also play role in the selection
of food.
(ii) Mechanical digestion of food: The ingested food is
physically broken down by the teeth through a process
called mastication (chewing). Chewing converts food
into smaller and more manageable pieces. This increases
their surface area for enzymatic action.
(iii) Chemical digestion of food: During the process of chewing salivary glands secrete
saliva into oral cavity. There are three pairs of salivary glands.
a. Sublingual glands: Situated below the tongue.
b. Submaxillary glands: Located behind the jaws.
★ Note: All questions and paragraphs marked with a star ★ are explanations of the Box
Information provided in the textbook.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
c. Parotid glands: Located in front of ears.
Composition of Saliva
Saliva is composed of:
(i) Water and Mucus: These moisten and lubricate the food.
(ii) Bicarbonate ions: These act as buffer to control pH of the oral cavity.
(iii) Thiocyanate ions: They kill microorganisms.
• pH of saliva: Fresh saliva is alkaline with pH 8 but it quickly loses CO2 and pH becomes 6.
• Salivary amylase: Saliva contains amylase which partially digests the polysaccharides
(starch and glycogen) to a disaccharide (maltose).
Bolus: After chemical and mechanical digestion in the oral cavity the food in the oral cavity
takes the form of a small moist mass called a bolus.
Q2. Explain the process of swallowing of food.
Ans. Pharynx is the cavity behind the month (oral cavity). It is the common passageway
for both the digestive and respiratory tracts. Bolus is pushed to the back of mouth and is
swallowed through the pharynx.
Swallowing of food
(i) During swallowing the tongue moves upwards and backwards against the roof of the
mouth this forces the bolus to the back of oral cavity.
(ii) Soft palate is raised against the back wall of pharynx, this closes the passage between
nasal cavity and pharynx.
(iii) At the same time larynx moves upwards and epiglottis (a flap of cartilage over glottis) is
lowered. This closes the opening of trachea (wind pipe).
(iv) In this way the bolus passes over the trachea and enters oesophagus.

Soft palate
elevated against
back wall of
pharynx
Bolus
Tongue moves
upwards and
backwards
Epiglottis
lowers
to close
glottis
Larynx moves
upwards
Soft palate
relaxes
Epiglottis
raises
Figure: Swallowing of food
★ Mechanism of Swallowing

--- Page 3 ---
The beginning of the swallowing action is voluntary but once the food reaches the back of
the mouth swallowing becomes automatic.
Q3. Explain movement of food through oesophagus.
Ans. 1. After being swallowed, the food enters the
tube oesophagus. It connects the pharynx to the
stomach. The digestive action of saliva continues in
oesophagus.
2. Oesophagus is 25cm long and its lower end opens
in stomach.
3. Food passes through oesophagus to stomach by a
process called peristalsis.
Motility of Alimentary Canal
Movement in the alimentary canal is of two types i.e.
peristalsis and segmentation.
1. Peristalsis: It is the rhythmic sequence of waves
of contraction in the smooth muscles of the walls of
alimentary canal. Peristalsis squeezes the food down
along the oesophagus and other parts of alimentary
canal.
Anti-peristalsis: Occasionally the peristaltic
movements may reverse in a process called
antiperistalsis. In this food is pushed from intestine
back into stomach and oral cavity. This is also called
as vomiting.
Hunger contractions: These are also peristaltic
movements caused by low glucose levels in blood,
creating the uncomfortable sensation known as hunger
pangs.
2. Segmentation: The small and large intestines also
have rings of smooth-muscles which contract and
relax repeatedly. These contractions and relaxations
create back and forth movement in the same place,
called segmentation. This movement mixes the food
with digestive secretions and thus increases the
efficiency of absorption.
Sphincters: The exit of food from the oesophagus to
the stomach is controlled by lower oesophageal
sphincter or cardiac sphincter (because it is near the
heart). This opens in response to the pressure exerted
by food. It also prevents back flow of stomach
contents into the oesophagus.
Q4. Explain structure and function of stomach.
Ans. Structure

--- Page 4 ---
1. Shape: It is an elastic muscular bag (J-shaped) situated after oesophagus and before
duodenum.
2. Location: It is located in the left side in abdominal cavity, below the diaphragm.
3. Portions
Stomach has three portions.
(i) Cardiac portion: It is present immediately after oesophagus.
(ii) Fundus portion: It is present on a side of cardiac portion.
(iii)Pyloric portion: It is located beneath the cardiac portion.
Stomach wall
1. Serosa: It is the outer covering and provides protection.
2. Muscularis Externa: There are three layers of smooth muscles outer longitudinal, middle
circular and inner oblique muscles.
3. Mucosa and Submucosa: Mucosa is the inner lining of the stomach. It contains gastric
glands that produce digestive juice. Submucosa lies beneath mucosa it contains blood
vessels, lymphatic vessel and nerve fibers.

Longitudinal
muscles
Circular
muscles
Oblique
muscles
Cardiac
portion
Fundus
portion
serosa
Submucosa
Mucosa
Pyloric
portion
Mucosa
Gastric pit
Epithelial Cell
Mucous
Cell
Parietal Cell
Chief Cell
Figure: Stomach; external and internal structure

Functions
1. Mechanical digestion: The muscular walls of stomach contract vigorously and help in
churning (shaking) and mixing of food with stomach secretions. The contractions also
generate enough heat to melt the solid fats.

--- Page 5 ---
2. Chemical digestion: The mucosa of stomach posses many tubular gastric glands which
open through the deep depressions called gastric pits. Each gastric gland has epithelial cells
and three secretary cells.
(i) Mucous cells: These secrete mucous which is thick secretion that covers the inside of
the stomach and protects it from HCl and digestive enzymes.
(ii) The parietal (oxyntic) cells: These secrete hydrochloric acid. It adjusts the pH of
stomach contents to about 2-3. HCl also softens the food and activates the protein digesting
enzyme, pepsinogen to pepsin. It also kills microorganisms.
(iii) Chief Cells: These cells secrete enzyme pepsinogen (inactive form of pepsin).
All the secretions of gastric glands are collectively called gastric juice. When the bolus
enters the stomach the gastric glands secrete gastric juice. H+ ions of HCl activate
pepsinogen into pepsin. Pepsin breaks protein into polypeptides (Contain 10-50 amino
acids) and peptides (Contain 2 to 50 amino acids).
Chyme: After about three to four hours after meal, stomach contents are mixed and in the
form of semi-liquid acidic mass called chyme. Pyloric sphincter controls the release of
chyme into small intestine.
★ Pyrosis or Heart Burn
Sometimes there is a back flush of acidic chyme from stomach into the oesophagus. It
causes a painful burning sensation in the chest and this is called Pyrosis or Heart burn.
Q5. Explain digestion in small intestine.
Ans. Small intestine is largest part of alimentary canal. It starts from stomach and ends at
large intestine. It has diameter of 2-3 cm and 6 metres' length. Food is not only digested but
also absorbed in small intestine.
Parts: Small intestine consists of three parts i.e. duodenum, jejunum and ileum.
1. Duodenum
(i) It is first 20-25 cm long part of small intestine. It is concerned with digestion of food. It
contains glands, which produce an alkaline secretion containing bicarbonate.
(ii) Two main secretions are poured into duodenum.
(a) Pancreatic juice: It is secreted from pancreas. It is slightly alkaline (pH 8) due to
presence of bicarbonate. It neutralizes the acidity of chyme. Important enzymes of
pancreatic juice are.
(i) Pancreatic amylase: It digests polysaccharides into maltose and even glucose.
(ii) Trypsinogen: It is an inactive form. Another enzyme enterokinase (secreted by walls of
duodenum) activates trypsinogen into trypsin, which digests proteins into polypeptides.
(iii)Chymotrypsin and carboxypeptidase, which digest proteins into smaller peptides and
then into amino acids.
(iv) Pancreatic lipase, which digest lipids into glycerol and fatty acids.
(v) Pancreatic nucleases, which digest DNA and RNA into nucleotides.
(b) Bile: It is the secretion of liver. Before its release it is stored in gallbladder. It contains
salts which emulsify fat and break them into small droplets (emulsion). These droplets
provide large surface areas for effective action of lipid digesting enzymes.
2. Jejunum and Ileum: Jejunum is 2.4 meters long, next to duodenum. Ileum is the last
three fifth i.e., about 3.5 metres long part of small intestine. These parts carry out the rest of

--- Page 6 ---
digestion and absorption of food. The walls of jejunum and ileum contain glands which
secrete intestinal juice. It contains various enzymes; e.g.,
• Aminopeptidase which digests polypeptides into dipeptides.
• Erypsin digests dipeptides into amino acids.
• Lipase digests fats into fatty acids and glycerol.
• Maltase digests maltose into glucose
• Sucrase digests sucrose into glucose and fructose
• Lactase digests lactose into glucose and galactose.
Chyle: In jejunum chyme after digestion is converted into alkaline emulsion called chyle.
Q6. Explain absorption of digested food and water.
Ans. The absorption of digested food, water, and dissolved minerals occurs in jejunum
and ileum. Inner wall of jejunum and ileum contains large circular folds. These folds have
several finger like projections called villi.
Structure of Villus
Each villus is richly supplied with blood capillaries and a vessel of lymphatic system, called
lacteal. The blood capillaries and lacteal are covered by a single-cell thick epithelium.
The epithelial cells of villi have many cytoplasmic projections, called microvilli. The total
surface area of absorption becomes extraordinarily increased due to villi and microvilli.
★ Appearance: Due to presence of folds and numerous villi the internal surface of jejunum
and ileum appears velvety.

Figure: Intestinal wall and detailed structure of villi
Absorption of simple sugars and amino acids
• Simple sugars (e.g., glucose) and amino acids are absorbed by diffusion or active
transport into the epithelial cells of villi.

--- Page 7 ---
• From here, these molecules enter the blood capillaries of villi.
• Blood capillaries of villi join to form hepatic portal vein which carries sugars and amino acids to liver.
• Liver stores extra glucose and amino acids in the form glycogen and proteins respectively.
• From liver, the required amounts of these products pass to heart via hepatic vein.
Absorption of Fatty acids and glycerol
• The products of fat digestion i.e., fatty acids and glycerol are absorbed by passive transport into the epithelial cells of villi. Here they combine to form triglycerides.
• The triglycerides are coated with proteins and small droplets, called chylomicrons.
• The chylomicrons enter the lacteals of villi.
• From the lacteals, the chylomicrons move into thoracic lymphatic duct, and then into the blood stream. Chylomicrons in blood are hydrolysed by the enzymes of blood plasma back into fats and proteins.
• Fats are further hydrolyzed into fatty acids and glycerol and enter the body cells.
★ Absorption of fats
Fats are insoluble in water. So, they cannot be attacked readily by lipase enzymes of pancreatic juice. Bile salts act as detergent molecules. They break fats into droplets and keep them separate from one another.
Q7. Describe structure and function of large intestine.
Ans. Structure of Large Intestine
1. It is much shorter than small intestine and makes the last meter of the intestinal tract.
2. It is involved in the absorption of water and salts and vitamin K from the lumen (cavity) of intestine into the blood. The large intestine is not convoluted (coiled) and its inner surface does not possess villi.
Parts: Large intestine has three parts.
a. Caecum
It is a blind sac that projects from the area of large intestine between ileum and colon. From the blind end of caecum, vermiform (finger like) process arises called as appendix. In humans appendix has no function so it is vestigial (non-functional).
b. Colon
Next to caecum is the colon. It has an ascending, a transverse and a descending limb. Its main function is to absorb water. As the water is absorbed, the remaining material becomes more solid. These wastes products are called faeces, these consist of large number of bacteria, undigested plant fibres (e.g., cellulose), and other food stuff, sloughed off mucosal cells, bile pigments and water.
c. Rectum
It is the last part of large intestine where faeces are stored for short time. At its distal end, the rectum opens out through anus. Anus is surrounded by two sphincters; the internal sphincter is made of smooth muscles and the outer is made of striated muscles. When the rectum is filled up with faeces, it gives rise to a defecation reflex. The defecation reflex can be consciously inhibited in adults but in infants it is controlled involuntarily. Later on the child learns to control this reflex voluntarily.

--- Page 8 ---
Vitamin K Production: Many bacteria, e.g E.coli, live and actively divide in the colon.
They produce amino acids and vitamin K. Vitamin K is necessary for blood coagulation. It
is absorbed from the large intestine into the blood.
Q8. Write note on control of Egestion.
Ans. Egestion is removal of the undigested food from the rectum. It is an involuntary act
in infants while voluntary in the adults. There are two stages of egestion control i.e.
Neurological and muscular development.
1. In infants, egestion is an involuntary reflex mediated by the spinal cord. Here the rectal
distension triggers automatic relaxation of the internal anal sphincter and expulsion of waste.
This occurs because the higher centres (cerebral cortex) are not yet fully developed.
2. In adults, because cerebral cortex is mature, this allows conscious regulation of external
anal sphincter to delay or initiate defecation.
This transition (change) reflects the integration (combination) of reflex pathways with
cognitive (concious) control, adapting to social and environmental demands.
This means that in adults when brain is fully developed, motor neurons from cerebral cortex,
change this involuntary action of egestion, controlled by neurons of spinal cord only in
infants, to the voluntary action in adults. So adults can control (initiate or inhibit) egestion
voluntarily as per situation or requirement.
Q9. Write note an accessory dige tive organs.
Ans. 1. Liver and Gallbladder
i. Liver plays a vital role in digestion by producing bile, which is essential for fat digestion.
Bile emulsifies fats (during emulsification large fat globules are converted into smaller
ones). This makes them easier for enzymes to digest.
ii. Liver also modifies nutrients absorbed from the small intestine.
iii. It detoxifies the harmful substances.
iv. It synthesizes proteins.
v. It stores glycogen for energy.
vi. Gall bladder stores and concentrate bile produced by liver. When food enters the small
intestine, bile is released from the gall bladder into duodenum through bile duct.
2. Pancreas
i. It is a large gland situated just ventral to the stomach.
ii. It has exocrine and endocrine portion. The exocrine (with duct) portion secretes
pancreatic juice through pancreatic duct, which joins into the common bile duct from the
liver and enters the duodenum.
iii. Pancreatic juice contains enzymes for the digestion of all groups of food. The main
enzymes are trypsin, chymotrypsin, lipases, amylases, nucleases etc.
iv. The endocrine (ductless) portion of pancreas secretes insulin and glucagon hormones into
extracellular fluid from where they diffuse into nearby capillaries.
Q10. Write short note on hormonal control of the secretions of pancreas and
liver.
Ans. 1. The release of secretions from pancreas and liver is controlled by hormones.
2. When chyme enters duodenum from stomach, its acidity stimulates duodenal walls to
release secretin.

--- Page 9 ---
3. Similarly, the partially digested proteins and fats present in chyme stimulate the duodenal
walls to secrete another hormone, cholecystokinin (CCK). Both these hormones stimulate
pancreas to release pancreatic juice, and gallbladder to release bile.
Cholecystokinin
Cholecystokinin is a hormone produced in the small intestine that play a key role in
digestion by triggering the gall bladder to release bile into small intestine, stimulating
pancreatic enzyme release and regulating appetite.

Liver
Right hepatic
duct
Left hepatic
duct
Hepatic
portal vein
Spleen
Common
hepatic duct
Hepatic
artery
Gallbladder
Stomach
Cystic duct
Pancreas
Duodenum
(first past of
small intestine)
Common
bile duct
Figure: Accessory Digestive Organs

Q11. Explain storage and metabolic role of liver.
Ans. The liver performs many important functions like storing nutrient and regulating
metabolism.
1. Storage
• It stores excess nutrients from the food and releases them when body needs energy or
building materials.
• The stored nutrients include glucose (stored as glycogen), vitamins (like A, D, B12, and
K), minerals (e.g., iron and copper) and fats along with fat-soluble substances.
2. Metabolic role
a. Conversion: It converts excess glucose into glycogen and back when needed.
b. Breakdown: It breaks down fats to produce energy.
3. Synthesis
(i) If forms cholesterol and lipoproteins.
(ii) It synthesizes urea by removing ammonia produced from amino acids. Urea is then
excreted in urine.
4. Detoxification: It breaks down and removes toxins, drugs, and alcohol from the blood.
5. Hormonal Regulation: Liver also helps in breaking down and regulating hormones.
Q12. Describe the hormonal and nervous regulation of gastric acid secretion.
Ans. The secretion of gastric juice is regulated by both the nervous system and hormonal

--- Page 10 ---
mechanisms.
1. In reaction to the smell, sight or thought of food, the medulla of brain sends message to
the gastric glands to secrete small amounts of gastric juice.
2. When food arrives in stomach, the distension (expansion) of stomach and decrease in pH
of gastric contents stimulate more secretion and powerful contraction.
3. The presence of proteins in food stimulate special endocrine cells present in the mucosa
of stomach to release a hormone called gastrin. Gastrin is carried by blood to gastric
glands where it stimulates them to produce and secrete more gastric juice.
4. When food moves from stomach to small intestine, a hormone called somatostatin stops
the release of hydrochloric acid.

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch9 Long Q.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [35/36]: 11th Bio New Ch9 MCQ's.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 9: Human Digestive System

Multiple Choice Questions

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)

1. Where does chemical digestion of
carbohydrates begin?
(a) Stomach (b) Oesophagus
(c) Small intestine (d) Mouth
2. Which enzyme in saliva starts
breaking down starch?
(a) Lipase (b) Amylase (Ptyalin)
(c) Trypsin (d) Pepsin
3. What prevents food from entering the
trachea during swallowing?
(a) Epiglottis
(b) Oesophageal sphincter
(c) Uvula
(d) Tongue
4. Why does the enzyme activity drops in
the stomach when pH rises?
(a) Acid blocks food entry
(b) Enzymes denature in low pH
(c) Enzymes need acidic pH to work
(d) Saliva dilutes gastric juice
5. Which change would most affect
protein digestion?
(a) Blocking bile release
(b) Inhibiting salivary glands
(c) Inhibiting pepsin production
(d) Slowing peristalsis

6. Why is lipase not active in the
stomach?
(a) It is destroyed by acid
(b) It needs alkaline pH to work
(c) It is secreted by the liver
(d) It digests only proteins
7. Which stomach secretion activates
pepsin and kills bacteria?
(a) Bile
(b) Hydrochloric acid (HCl)
(c) Sodium bicarbonate
(d) Mucus
8. Why is segmentation important in the
small intestine?
(a) It absorbs bile
(b) It breaks down enzymes
(c) It mixes food with digestive juices
(d) It pushes food to the rectum
9. What is the function of villi and
microvilli in the small intestine?
(a) Produce enzymes
(b) Increase surface area for absorption
(c) Store bile
(d) Neutralize stomach acid
10. Which best explains the liver's role in
digestion?
(a) It produces insulin
(b) It stores undigested food
(c) It produces bile for fat digestion
(d) It secretes enzymes into the colon

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
SLO BASED MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
Anatomy and Physiology of Digestive
System
11. The GI tract is a continuous tube that
extends from:
(a) Mouth to Anus
(b) Mouth to Stomach
(c) Mouth to Rectum
(d) Mouth to large intestine
12. Which of the following help to retain
food in oral cavity?
(a) Tongue
(c) Lips
(b) Teeth
(d) Epiglottis
13. Muscular tongue plays its role in
selection of food through:
(a) Taste buds (b) Muscles
(c) Saliva
(d) Ptyalin
14. Mastication is a type of:
(a) Extra cellular digestion
(b) Intracellular digestion
(c) Chemical digestion
(d) Mechanical digestion
15. How many pairs of salivary glands are
present in man?
(a) One
(c) Three
(b) Two
(d) Four
16. Fresh saliva has pH of:
(a) 2
(c) 6
(b) 4
(d) 8
17. In oral cavity the food mass is in the
form of a small moist mass called:
(a) Bolus
(c) Chyle
(b) Chyme
(d) Lump
18. Which salivary glands are present in
front of ears:
(a) Sublingual
(c) Parotid
(b) Submaxillary
(d) Carotid
19. Saliva contains enzyme called as:
(a) Amylase
(c) Pepsin
(b) Trypsin
(d) Lipase
20. Entry of bolus into trachea is
prevented by:
(a) Palate
(c) Glottis
(b) Soft palate
(d) Epiglottis
21. Food moves down through the
oesophagus to the stomach by:
(a) Gravity
(c) Antiperistalsis
(b) Peristalsis
(d) Homeostasis
22. Which sphincter is present between
oesophagus and stomach:
(a) Cardiac sphincter
(b) Renal sphincter
(c) Cephalic sphincter
(d) Ileocolic sphincter
23. Which movement results in the mixing
of digestive secretion with food:
(a) Peristalsis
(c) Segmentation
(b) Fragmentation
(d) Hydration
24. Antiperistalsis is also called:
(a) Vomiting
(c) Dehydration
(b) Pyrexia
(d) Swallowing
25. Which portion of stomach is present
immediately after oesophagus:
(a) Fundus
(c) Cardiac
(b) Pyloric
(d) Hepatic
26. Which is not part of stomach:
(a) Colic portion
(b) Cardiac portion
(c) Fundus portion
(d) Pyloric
27. How many layers of smooth muscles
are present in stomach wall?
(a) One
(c) Three
(b) Two
(d) Four
28. Gastric glands are present in:
(a) Mucosa
(c) Serosa
(b) Submucosa
(d) Muscularis
29. HCl is secreted by:
(a) Oxyntic cells
(c) Mucous cells
(b) Chief cells
(d) zymogen cells

--- Page 3 ---
30. Pepsinogen is activated by:
(a) HCl (b) Mucous
(c) Water (d) NaCl
31. The semi solid acidic mass of stomach
after three to four hours of a meal is
called:
(a) Bolus (b) Chyme
(c) Chyle (d) Lump
32. Chyme is released into small intestine
through:
(a) Pyloric sphincter
(b) Cardiac sphincter
(c) Ileocolic sphincter
(d) Rectal sphincter
33. Secretion of gastric juice is regulated
by:
(a) Visual mechanism
(b) Nervous system
(c) Hormonal mechanisms
(d) Both b and c
34. Which of the following hormone is
secreted by stomach?
(a) Pepsin (b) Secretion
(c) Gastrin (d) Somatostatin
35. Which hormone stops the secretion of
hydrochloric acid:
(a) Gastrin (b) Somatostatin
(c) Adrenalin (d) Secretin
36. pH of pancreatic juice is slightly
alkaline due to presence of:
(a) Carbonate (b) Bicarbonate
(c) Sulfate (d) Phosphate
37. Trypsinogen is activated to trypsin by:
(a) Pepsinogen (b) Lipase
(c) Enterokinase (d) Nuclease
38. Pancreatic nucleases digest:
(a) Nucleus (b) Nucleic acids
(c) Nucleotides (d) Nucleolus
39. Bile before secretion is stored in:
(a) Urinary bladder
(b) Swim bladder
(c) Gall bladder
(d) Renal bladder

40. Dipeptides are digested to amino acids
by:
(a) Erypsin (b) Trypsin
(c) Pepsin (d) Insulin
41. Enzymes of intestinal juice convert
chyme into:
(a) Bolus (b) Chyle
(c) Faeces (d) Lymph
42. For absorption of food each villus is
richly supplied with blood capillaries
and:
(a) Nerve (b) Lacteal
(c) Arteries (d) Veins
43. Microvilli are:
(a) Cytoplasmic projection
(b) Special cells
(c) Type of flagella
(d) Type of cilia
44. Hepatic portal vein carries sugar and
proteins to:
(a) Heart (b) Kidney
(c) Liver (d) Lungs
45. Chylomicrons are triglycerides coated
with:
(a) Fats (b) Proteins
(c) Vitamins (d) Enzymes
46. Large intestine is involved in
absorption of which vitamin:
(a) A (b) D
(c) E (d) K
47. Vermiform appendix arises for:
(a) Caecum (b) Rectum
(c) Jejunum (d) Ileum
48. Next to the caecum is:
(a) Ileum (b) Jejunum
(c) Duodenum (d) Colon
49. At its distal end rectum opens out
through:
(a) Colon (b) Anus
(c) Mouth (d) Caecum
50. Anus is surrounded by how many
sphincters:
(a) One (b) Two
(c) Three (d) Four

--- Page 4 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                                               [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

51. Which bacteria live and actively
divide in colon:
(a) E.coli (b) Salmonella
(c) Clostridium (d) Mycobacterium
52. In infants control of egestion is:
(a) Voluntary (b) Involuntary
(c) Instant (d) Delayed
53. Emulsification of fats is done by:

(a) Bile (b) Trypsin
(c) Lipase (d) Maltose
54. Pancreatic juice is secreted by which
part of pancreas:
(a) Endocrine portion
(b) Distal portion
(c) Proximal portion
(d) Exocrine portion

55. Endocrine portion of pancreas
secrete:
(a) Gastrin and Secretin
(b) Gastrin and Somatostatin
(c) Insulin and Glucagon
(d) Secretin and cholecystokinin
56. Which hormone are secreted by
duodenal walls:
(a) Secretin and cholecystokinin
(b) Insulin and glucagon
(c) Gastric and secretin
(d) Gastric and somatostatins
57. Liver converts excess glucose into:
(a) Sucrose (b) Maltose
(c) Glycogen (d) Amylose
58. Urea is synthesized in:
(a) Liver (b) Kidney
(c) Lungs (d) Heart

                                     ANSWER KEY
1. d 2. b 3. a 4. c 5. c 6. b 7. b 8. c
9. b 10. c 11. a 12. c 13. a 14. d 15. c 16. d
17. a 18. c 19. a 20. d 21 b 22. a 23. c 24. a
25. c 26. a 27. c 28 a 29. a 30. a 31. b 32 a
33. d 34. c 35. b 36. b 37. c 38. b 39. c 40. a
41. b 42. b 43. a 44. c 45. b 46. d 47. a 48. d
49. b 50. b 51. a 52. b 53. a 54. d 55. c 56. a
57. c 58. a

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                                 [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch9 MCQ's.txt ---



==================================================
START OF FILE [36/36]: 11th Bio New Ch9 Short Q.txt
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Unit 9: Human Digestive System

Short Questions

SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS EXERCISE

Q1. What is the main function of the
digestive system?
Ans. Function of digestive system is to
break down food into smaller and
absorbable components.

Q2. What is the mode of action of
saliva in mouth?
Ans. Saliva has following actions.
1. It moistens and lubricates food.
2. Bicarbonate ions kill microorganisms.
3. Salivary amylase partly digests the
polysaccharides (starch and glycogen) to
disaccharide (maltose).

Q3. What is role of tongue in the
mouth?
Ans. During swallowing the tongue moves
upwards and backwards against the roof of
the mouth. With this bolus is pushed to the
back of the mouth and is swallowed through
the pharynx.

Q4. What role does the epiglottis play
during swallowing?
Ans. During swallowing the epiglottis
closes the opening of trachea. In this way
bolus passes over the trachea and enters
oesophagus.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM] [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 2 ---
Q5. What is the composition of gastric
juice?
Ans. Gastric juice contains
1. Mucous secreted by mucous cells.
2. Hydrochloric acid by parietal (oxyntic)
cells.
3. Enzyme pepsinogen by chief cells.
Q6. Why is hydrochloric acid (HCl)
important in the stomach?
Ans. Hydrochloric acid is important in
following ways.
1. It adjusts the pH of stomach content to
about 2-3.
2. It softens the food.
3. It activates the pepsinogen.
4. It kills the microorganisms.
Q7. What is the difference between
bolus and chyme?
Ans. 1. Bolus: After mechanical and
chemical digestive processes in the oral
cavity food mass is in the form of a small
moist mass called bolus.
2. Chyme: About three to four hours after a
meal the stomach contents have been
sufficiently mixed into a semi-liquid mass
called chyme.
Q8. Which organ produces bile, and
what is its function?
Ans. Bile is secreted by liver. It contains
salts which emulsify fats and break them
into small droplets (emulsion) this provides
large surface area for effective action of
lipids digesting enzymes.
Q9. Differentiate between physical and
chemical digestion.
Ans. Physical (mechanical) digestion: In
this ingested food in physically broken down
by the teeth through a process called
mastication. This converts food into smaller
pieces thus increasing the surface area for
enzymatic action.
Chemical digestion: It is process of
breaking down large insoluble food
molecules into smaller, soluble molecules
using enzymes e.g. conversion of starch into
maltose by enzyme amylase.
Q10. What do you understand by
emulsification of fats?
Ans. During emulsification, fats are
broken down into small droplets. These
droplets provide large surface areas for
effective action of lipid digesting enzymes.
Q11. What is of the role of the pyloric
sphincter in digestion?
Ans. Pyloric sphincter is a muscular valve
at the bottom of stomach. It regulates the
release of chyme from the stomach to the
small intestine.
Q12. How do villi and microvilli help in
nutrient absorption?
Ans. Each villus is richly supplied with
blood capillaries and lymphatic vessels.
These are covered by single cell thick
epithelium. The epithelial cells of villi have
countless cytoplasmic projection called
microvilli. The total surface area of
absorption becomes extraordinarily large
due to villi and microvilli.
Q13. What are the main functions of the
large intestine?
Ans. Following are the main functions of
large intestine.
i. It is involved in the absorption of water,
salts and vitamin K.
ii. Many bacteria live and divide in this
large intestine (colon). They produce
amino acids and vitamin K, necessary
for coagulation of blood.
Q14. What causes jaundice in the
digestive system?
Ans. When bile pigments are prevented
from leaving the digestive tract, they may
accumulate in blood causing a condition
known as jaundice.

--- Page 3 ---
Q15. How does stress negatively impact
digestion?
Ans. Stress impacts digestion by
(i) Decreased production of digestive
enzymes.
(ii) Slowing down the process, i.e. slow gut
motility.
(iii) Increasing stomach acid due to release of
stress hormones like cortisol.
(iv) Cause entering of bacteria into blood
stream.
(v) Increased gas production or diarrhoea.

SLO BASED SHORT QUESTION ANSWERS
Anatomy and Physiology of Digestive
System
Q16. Give parts of digestive system of
man.
Ans. Following are the parts of digestive
system of man.
a) Gastrointestinal tract (GI)
b) Accessory digestive organs i.e. liver and
pancreas, gall bladder and salivary
glands.
Q17. Define GI tract and accessory
digestive organs.
Ans. The GI tract is a continuous tube that
extends from mouth to anus. It includes oral
cavity, pharynx, oesophagus, stomach, small
intestine and large intestine. The accessory
digestive organs include the salivary glands,
liver, gallbladder and pancreas.
Q18. Define mastication. Write its role
in digestion.
Ans. It is also known as chewing. In this
process the food is broken down into smaller
and more manageable pieces by using teeth.
Mastication increase the surface area of food
for enzymatic action.
Q19. Name three pairs of salivary
glands. Give composition of saliva.
Ans.
i. Sublingual glands
ii. Sub maxillary glands
iii. Parotid gland
Composition of saliva: Saliva is composed
of following components.
• Water and mucous
• Bicarbonate and thiocyanate ions
• Salivary amylase (enzyme)
Q20. Digestion is crucial for converting
food into energy. Comment.
Ans. Digestion is crucial for converting
food into energy and raw materials required
for growth, repair and maintenance of body
functions. It supports the immune system,
provides essential nutrients and ensures
overall health. Efficient digestion prevents
nutrient deficiencies, supports metabolism
and maintains energy levels, making it vital
for sustaining life.
Q21. What is bolus? In which part of
respiratory system it is produced?
Ans. Bolus is a soft and moist mass od
chewed food, which is produced after
mastication due to physical and chemical
digestion of food in oral cavity.
★Q22. Is swallowing action voluntary or
involuntary action.
Ans. The beginning of the swallowing
action is voluntary but once the bolus
reaches the back of the mouth, swallowing
becomes involuntary.
Q23. What is function of epiglottis.
Ans. During swallowing epiglottis closes
the opening of trachea. In this way bolus
passes over the trachea and enters the
oesophagus.
Q24. What are lips? Give their
functions.
Ans. 1. Lips: Lips are made of highly
vascularized (with blood vessels) skeletal

--- Page 4 ---
muscle tissues and many sensory nerve
endings.
2. Functions of Lips
i. Lips help to retain food as is being
chewed.
ii. They also play a role in phonation of
sound (it means to central airflow and
shaping the vocal tract to produce
sounds).
Q25. Define peristalsis.
Ans. It is rhythmic sequence of waves of
contraction in the smooth muscles of the
walls of alimentary canal. Peristalsis
squeeze the food down along oesophagus
and other parts of alimentary canal.
Q26. What is meant by segmentation?

Ans. The contraction and relaxation of the
rings of smooth muscles in small and large
intestine is called segmentation. This creates
back and forth movement in the same place.
This movement mixes the food with
digestive secretions and improves
absorption.
Q27. What is antiperistalsis?
Ans. The reverse movements of peristalsis
are called antiperistalsis. In this food is
pushed from intestine back into the stomach
and oral cavity, leading to vomiting.
Q28. What is hunger pang?
Ans. It is an uncomfortable sensation
created by peristaltic movements triggered
by low blood glucose levels.
★Q29.What is pyrosis or heartburn?

Ans. Sometimes there is a back flush of
acidic chyme from stomach into the
oesophagus. It causes a painful burning
sensation in the chest. This is called heart
burn.
Q30. Name three portions of stomach.
Ans. 1. Cardiac portion
2. Fundus portion
3. Pyloric portion

Q31. Give composition of middle layer
of stomach.
Ans. The middle layer of stomach is made
of smooth muscles. There are three layers of
these muscles.
1. Outer longitudinal muscles.
2. Middle circular muscles.
3. Inner oblique muscles.
Q32. Give composition of gastric glands.

Ans. Each gastric gland contains epithelial
cells and three secretory cell.
1. Mucous cells – which secrete mucous.
2. Parietal cells – which secrete
hydrochloric acid.
3. Chief cells – which secrete enzyme
pepsinogen.
Q33. What do you know about Rennin?

Ans. In infants, the gastric juice contains
large amounts of rennin enzyme. This
enzyme coagulates milk proteins and delays
the passage of milk into small intestine. This
helps other enzymes to digest milk proteins.
Q34. What is chyme and pyloric
sphincter?
Ans. Chyme is a semi-liquid acidic mass
formed after three to four hours after a meal.
Pyloric sphincter is located between
pyloric end of stomach and duodenum. It
controls the release of chyme into the small
intestine.
★Q35.How mucosa of stomach is
protected?
Ans. The mucosa of stomach can get
damaged by hydrochloric acid and pepsin.
So mucosa is protected in two ways.
1. By coating of viscous mucous.
2. Bicarbonate ions which neutralize acid.
Q36. Name the hormones secreted by
stomach. Also write its function.
Ans. Gastrin is the hormone secreted by
stomach. It is carried by blood to gastric

--- Page 5 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

glands where it stimulates them to produce
and secrete more gastric juice.
Q37. What is pancreatic juice? Write
the names of enzymes present in it.
Ans. It is the secretion of pancreas and is
poured into duodenum. It is slightly alkaline
(pH 8) due to presence of bicarbonate. It
neutralizes the acidity of chyme. The
important enzymes in pancreatic juice are:
(i) Pancreatic amylase which digests
polysaccharides into maltose and even
glucose.
(ii) Trypsinogen which is in inactive form.
Another enzyme enterokinase (secreted by
the walls of duodenum) activates
trypsinogen into trypsin which digests
proteins into polypeptides.
(iii) Chymotrypsin and carboxypeptidase,
which digest proteins into smaller peptides
and then into amino acids.
(iv) Pancreatic lipase which digests lipids
to glycerol and fatty acids.
(v) Pancreatic nucleases which digest DNA
and RNA into nucleotides.
★Q38. What is jaundice?
Ans. If bile pigments, are prevented from
leaving digestive tract, they may accumulate
in blood, causing a condition known as
jaundice.
Q39. Write function of enterokinase.

Ans. It converts inactive trypsinogen into
active trypsin, which digest proteins into
smaller peptides and then into amino acids.
Q40. Give composition and action of
bile.
Ans. Bile contains salts, water and
bilirubin pigment. Its function is
emulsification of fats.
Q41. Differentiate between chyme and
chyle.
Ans. Chyme is a semi-liquid acidic mass
formed in stomach after three to four hours
of meal. While chyle is the chyme converted

into alkaline emulsion by the action of
intestinal juice.
Q42. Differentiate between villi and
microvilli and give their significance.

Ans. Villi are the finger like projections
present on the folds on inner side of wall of
jejunum and ileum. Epithelial cells of villi
have many cytoplasmic projections called
microvilli.
Q43. What is lacteal? Give its function.

Ans. It is a small lymphatic vessel found in
the villi of small intestine. It absorbs fats
and fat-soluble vitamins.
★Q44. What is significance of villi and
microvilli?
Ans. They increase the total surface area
of absorption. Due to presence of folds and
numerous villi, the internal surface of
jejunum and ileum appears velvety.
Q45. What are chylomicrons?
Ans. The products of fat digestion i.e.
fatty acids and glycerol are absorbed into
epithelial cells of villi. Here they combine to
form triglycerides. The triglycerides are
coated with proteins to form small droplets
called chylomicrons.
Q46. What is appendix?
Ans. Caecum is a blind sac that projects
from the area of large intestine between
ileum and colon. From the blind end of
caecum there arises a finger-like process
called vermiform appendix. In human
digestive system appendix performs no
function so it is vestigial (non-functional).
★Q47. What is appendicitis and
appendectomy?
Ans. Appendicitis is the inflammation of
the appendix. It is usually due to bacterial
infection. The infected appendix must be
removed surgically otherwise it may burst
and inflammation may spread in entire
living of abdomen. The surgical removal of
appendix is called appendectomy.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- Page 6 ---
Q48. What is composition of Faeces?
Ans. Faeces contains large number of bacteria, indigestible plant fibers, undigested food stuff, sloughed off mucosal cells, bile pigments and water.
Q49. Name parts of large intestine and their function.
Ans.
1. Caecum: It helps in absorption of water and electrolytes.
2. Colon: It absorbs water and maintain electrolyte balance and formation of faeces.
3. Rectum: It stores faeces temporarily.
Q50. Name the portions of pancreas. Also write their secretions.
Ans. It has exocrine and endocrine portions. The exocrine (ducted) portion secretes its secretion i.e., pancreatic juice into pancreatic duct. Pancreatic juice contains enzymes for the digestion of all groups of food. Its major enzymes include trypsin, chymotrypsin, lipases, amylases, nucleases etc. The endocrine (ductless) portion of pancreas secretes its secretion i.e., insulin and glucagon hormones into extracellular fluid from where they diffuse into nearby capillaries.
★Q51. How gall stones are formed?
Ans. Cholesterol secreted by the liver, may precipitate in the gall bladder to produce gall stones which may block release of bile.
Q52. Give functions of secretin and cholecystokinin.
Ans. Both these hormones stimulate pancreas to release pancreatic juice and gall bladder to release bile.
Q53. Describe the role of liver in the storage of nutrients.
Ans. The liver performs many important functions, especially in storing nutrients and regulating metabolism. It stores excess nutrients from the food and releases them when the body needs energy or building materials. These nutrients stored in the liver include glucose (stored as glycogen), vitamins (like A, D, B12, and K), minerals (e.g., iron and copper) and fats and fat-soluble substances.
Q54. Liver play role in metabolism. Justify.
Ans. It helps in breaking down, building up, and converting substances in the body. For example, it converts excess glucose into glycogen and back when needed. It also breaks down fats to produce energy and forms cholesterol and lipoproteins. It converts amino acids and removes harmful ammonia by turning it into urea, which is excreted in urine. It breaks down and removes toxins, drugs and alcohol from the blood. The liver also helps in breaking down and regulating hormones.

LONG QUESTIONS (EXERCISE)
Q1. Explain the complete process of digestion, starting from ingestion in the mouth to egestion in the large intestine. Include the roles of mechanical and chemical digestion at each stage.
Ans. See Q1. of theory.
Q2. Describe the structure and function of the stomach in digestion.
Ans. See Q4. of theory.
Q3. Compare and contrast the roles of the small intestine and large intestine in digestion.
Ans. See Q5. and Q7. of theory.
Q4. Explain the absorption of food from the small intestine?
Ans. See Q6. of theory.

--- Page 7 ---
[WANT TO GET ALL SUBJECT NOTES: WWW.FREEILM.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

Q5. Discuss accessory organs (liver, | Q6. Describe the hormonal and
gallbladder and pancreas) and their | nervous regulation of gastric acid
contributions in digestion. | secretion.
Ans. See Q9., Q10. and Q11. of theory. | Ans. See Q12. of theory.

INQUISITIVE QUESTIONS
Q.1 Why does the small intestine need both peristalsis and segmentation?
Ans. Because peristalsis squeezes the food down the gastrointestinal tract. While in
segmentation contractions and relaxation of rings of smooth muscles mixes the food with
digestive secretion and increase the efficiency of absorption as well.
Q.2 How does the liver help digestion without using enzymes?
Ans. Liver helps in digestion by production of bile. Bile contains salts which emulsify fats
and break than into small droplets. These droplets provide large surface areas for effective
action of lipids digesting enzymes.
Q.3 Why do we need bile if we already have enzymes for fat digestion?
Ans. Fats are insoluble in water. So they cannot be attacked readily by lipase (fat digesting
enzymes) of pancreatic juice. Also the bile salts act as detergent molecules they break fats
into droplet and keep them separate from one another.
Q.4 How does the pancreas “know” when to release its enzymes?
Ans. Secretin and cholecystokinin (CCK) hormones released by duodenal stimulate
pancreas to release pancreatic juice and gallbladder to release bile.
Q.5 Why are pancreatic secretions alkaline, not acidic?
Ans. Pancreatic secretions are alkaline, not acidic because;
1. To neutralize the acidic chyme from the stomach.
2. Creating an optional environment for pancreatic enzymes to function effectively.

[REPORT ANY MISTAKE AT: FREEILM786@GMAIL.COM]                                     [WEBSITE: WWW.FREEILM.COM]

--- END OF FILE: 11th Bio New Ch9 Short Q.txt ---

